If I can call this meeting to order.
Thank you. And I'm
I'm asking the superintendent to.
Call the roll.
Dean here.
Dowling here, feller here.
Holman here, Richardson.
Here, rich here, Smith here.
Kabisa Davidson. And I believe that we have an email
from.
Angela. Okay. And she's not gonna be here. Okay. But
she did.
Request some information. Okay. I, I did see Alex as
this is a public proceeding, unless the board of education.
Specifically votes to enter into executive session.
The public has the right to hear everything and to
look at all exhibits.
Exhibits, please let us know if you're experiencing difficulties with
accessibility.
Members of the district staff are located.
In the lecture hall and can provide assistance.
The school board works for a prepared agenda.
Which is posted in advance on the district website and
printed copies.
Of this evening's agenda are available near the entrance of
the lecture hall.
Fellow board members, please remember that Robert's rules of order.
States that members may speak no more than twice on
the same question.
At any one meeting.
Except by permission of the board chair.
Questions brief suggestions or points of clarification are not counted
as speaking in debate.
The board asks that a pub, the public audience refrain.
From clapping, booing, side comments or other behaviors.
Behaviors that could interrupt the flow of speakers. Every person
is entitled to speak their opinion and to feel safe
in the process.
I wanted to begin.
By acknowledging first.
That something that happened at last Monday's meeting.
And member rich made a comment about Dr. Prince's.
Prince's performance and I should have.
Recognized that, and I did not, but it was a
violation of our rules of decorum.
I missed it completely. And I apologize for that.
And I'd like to give member rich a chance to
speak as well.
I wanna apologize to Dr. Prince.
I was out of line.
I appreciate your willingness.
To accept my apology.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. A member rich.
The other thing that I will say as we open
first, I understand that there's been significant reaction to the
board's vote on reconfiguration.
Which occurred Monday night, please accept our appreciation.
For those who did not support this decision, but who
want to help us make this happen as smoothly as
it can.
We also heard from parents.
That the recommendation to have four early release days added
to the calendar is not easy on families.
And because of that, I will accept emotion.
To remove that item from the agenda.
Resulting in having no consideration for that item tonight.
I apologize to those who came specifically.
To speak about that item. If the board votes to
remove it.
And if the board does vote to remove it, Dr.
Aunt whistles will pursue options.
With the commissioner regarding a waiver for student days.
As one possible idea.
We're aware that
there's a need for ed techs and teachers.
Teachers to
to plan and in moving forward.
And this was presented as an idea of a way
that we, that, that Dr. Prince thought would be helpful.
It's particularly challenging for parents. And we understand that. So,
if there is a motion.
To move by.
Member Dowling and seconded by member Richardson.
To remove that item.
From the agenda.
And are there any other comments about that? A member
Richardson?
Member dialing. Did you wanna speak since you, I, I
just had a couple questions. No, thanks. Okay.
Can you explain the, the waiver.
Process that you're potentially exploring.
For does that mean cutting the school year shorter? It,
it, it would do that by one day by one
day. So it, it is a waiver that we request
from the commissioner.
For a reduction of one school day so that we
can, so that we can make that a training day.
But it sounds like we needed two days.
For
or teachers and staff to.
Like that's what the original proposal was, was a total
of two days.
I'm I'm. I mean, I'm, I'm counting two half days
is one day.
So if we're only gonna like, is one day enough,
like is kind of what I'm trying to, I think
that's the, probably the limit in terms of the weight,
a waiver.
That's the limit on a waiver. Okay. And then it's
fine. I, I, I believe it is a, a limit
on, I believe it's too on the waiver. Yes, I
see.
So do we feel
are there plans for other.
Planning.
Beyond that one day, like with.
The teachers and staff.
So I believe that we would have a regular schedule.
Of staff development and
much of that would, for the, particularly for the elementary
schools would be focused on preparation for.
Reconfiguration.
Okay. And again, we're thinking that, that we only need
to do that for one day.
Before the end of the school year.
No the one day it was.
Was believed to be
best to get a start. Okay. On this project.
Okay. The, the regular
schedule contains professional development time out. That's already allocated.
And I'm saying that you asked, how else might they
do it? Oh, okay. It would be using the regular,
using the existing.
Early release stage. Got it. Okay. Right. Got it. I
understand now. And, or scheduled full days.
Okay, member Holman. I don't know if this is the
number that's readily at hand, but we are, our school
calendar is includes more days than a required strictly by
the state. Does it not? Mm-hmm .
Yes. Do you know how by how many? I think
it's, I.
It doesn't no, we were at 1 75. Yes, upstairs. Okay.
Thank you. That's what I wanted. We're at 180 for
teachers, correct?
This year, we're at 180 1 for staff and 1 75 for
students next year is when we do the increase. That
is part of the contractual growth. So.
Thank you. A questions member feller. So 181 days for
staff, 175 days for student. How many of those staff
days have already been expended? Well, like we'll get to
the end of the school year, year, and those are
181 days.
Would've already been consumed.
Yes. By the end of the, by the end of
the year. Yes. The staff would've worked 100 in 81
days. Okay. And what, what is the plan in terms
of professional development in the fall?
Like can those days be used to move classrooms or
no? That's for truly professional development. I, I think it's,
it, it is focused on.
Dealing with the, the content, the curriculum.
And the
you know, the assurance that, that.
That's that students are gonna get the supports that they
need during the process. And that's typically two days.
In the fall before the start of the school year
it's there's. I, I think that.
Three days.
Three. Okay. Yep.
Any other questions?
Questions. Just thank you. I think this is a good
idea.
I appreciate listening to the cries of working families.
Seeing no other comments, all those in favor of removing
this item.
From tonight's agenda. Say I.
Opposed. So that's unanimous.
The next thing is the, the vote on the budget
on June 9th, which I did just want to address many.
Have reported that as a result of the reconfiguration vote,
they will vote against the budget.
And while that's certainly within your right.
I just wanted to be clear that voting down the
budget does not change the action. The board took.
To move to reconfigure elementary school. So those are two
separate issues.
Issues the action was a holy separate vote.
And even if the budget were to fail, the decision
to reconfigure is still in place.
The budget vote is only to approve or not approve.
The total amount recommended to cover.
Our educational expenses and it does not affect either the
vote to close an elementary school or reconfigure grades.
If the budget were to fail.
It requires the boat, the board to consider the amount
of money.
Requested of the taxpayers and that, that is all we
can do.
I, I guess I would also say if we don't
have a budget in place by July one, our obligation
is to resort to the previous budget.
Which is about 2.5 million less.
So we would need to structure.
Our spending around that budget.
Until there is a, a budget passed.
So
additionally, the city council cannot override the decisions of the
school board. The only thing the city council.
Provides is guidance as to the amount of money.
Requested of taxpayers. So a final note about public comment.
The superintendent serves as the secretary of the board.
And is responsible for recording questions.
Questions. I try to add to that to help.
And we're both doing our best.
We try to answer as many questions as we can
on the night they are asked.
If we miss any questions, please send them to the
superintendent.
And you can copy them to the chair. We will
do our best to answer them as soon as possible.
And your understanding is appreciated. Thank you.
Next is the budget.
Update. So I'm gonna get started on this and then
Abigail's going to join us.
And then I'll be back. This is a pretty, pretty
quick presentation.
Before I begin, I want to acknowledge the employees.
Employees impacted by this budget. I'm truly sorry for the
impact. This has on you.
And it's through no fault of your own.
So you're very much in my thoughts.
Thoughts. I also want to thank our stakeholders.
Through emails, letters.
Letters in consistent presence across nine meetings.
Meetings workshops forums.
Forums where you've contributed to more than 20 hours of
testimony.
We've received your input.
We have received your input.
Well perspectives differ.
There is a real value in the respectful exchange of
ideas.
Ideas and we have been listening and we've been learning.
Much appreciated.
These changes will likely impact everyone connected to the south
Portland.
Schools in some fashion.
We understand.
The concerns and we're com committed.
To providing clear information to help navigate those concerns.
Concerns, our team is experienced.
Collaborative and deeply committed to this work.
At the same time we do need to recognize.
That not addressing
our current financial trajectory.
Would be irresponsible.
With consequences that would only grow.
Over time in terms of size and seriousness.
I wanna recognize the team that has led this complex
and emotional work.
With great care and diligence.
Dr. Prince finance director, Abigail ketin.
Our administrators.
Directors and our partners at the city, including.
The mayor and the city manager.
No process is perfect for sure.
But Dr. Prince has led the shift in improving.
The budget process and the many positive gains we have
seen.
This year are clearly attributable to her.
Tireless efforts.
Efforts together. We have met the financial parameters.
That have been set for us for 26, 27 budget.
By the city council.
It's been a great pleasure for me to be able
to.
Work with this team this year.
Abigail.
Hi, good evening everyone. I'm Abigail Katchen director of finance.
Could you advance the slides?
Might wanna adjust the mic a little bit towards you.
One more slide, please.
More slide.
Okay.
So we are proposing our FY 27 budget. These are
the cost centers.
That are part of our FY 27 expenses.
Expenses. What you're looking at is.
The same budget from the March 23rd meeting.
I'm sorry, the same budget from the March 30th meeting, which
was revised from the March 23rd meeting.
So this again has those same.
Edits the removal of the D I director. Then the
addition of the D I strategist, which would go to
the recall list from S SP from S PT, a.
The removal of the assistant director of special education.
Which would be replaced with an instructional strategist? Again, that's
from the recall list from the S P T a.
The health insurance cap.
Estimate was reduced from 12% to 11.5%.
Let's see, there's another lane change that I got that
I folded in.
In the meantime, and then there's another 30,000.
That was directed to capital costs for facilities.
So that is our overall budget.
But what I'd like to do is talk a little
bit about.
Kind of how, a little bit about the analysis of
this budget in general. So if you could go to
the next slide.
Well, that's our revenue. We can go one more slide.
Mm-hmm
okay. So I think something that is.
Unique about this year's budget is that we've taken a
really close look at prior year's actuals from several years
prior.
For context, we've had a deficit.
For a few years, we had a deficit, FY 24.
We had a, a deficit of FY 25, thereabouts, a
million or so.
We're projecting a deficit in this fiscal year. And there
are always, you know, multiple reasons for why this happens,
but as I've reviewed and really looked through expenses over
the years,
and also just reviewed, you know, our, our behavior. So
for example, we're projecting a deficit this year, but we
didn't scale up on staffing.
And as far as I can tell, we're not egregiously
overspending, but our budget is not sufficient.
To meet our needs. It doesn't meet the personnel needs
that we have it. Doesn't meet the non personnel needs.
We have.
So a, a big focus in the FY 27 budget
development has been.
To just really get real about.
Our costs and what things really cost. Okay.
So just, I'm putting up two examples.
Examples. Cause I think they're, they're pretty salient. Also the
two examples up there are.
Particularly unpredictable.
And that's where this kind of comes into play.
In, in a, in a unique way that can lead
to deficits. If we're not careful.
So the first example is tuition reimbursement.
Now, this is a welcomed cost. This is a contractually
obligated cost. The, this is employees.
Employees have the ability to work for? Well, they have
the ability to get up to nine credit hours at
university. Sometimes six, it depends on their contract, but this
is a contractually obligated costs. If they submit, submit the
paperwork, they get, get a, everything that they need to
get in order, we always say, yes.
So this is contractually obligated, but very unpredictable.
And again, we welcome this cost.
But if we're going to welcome a cost, we also
need to budget for it.
And as you can see in FY 23, FY 24,
FY 25 already in this fiscal year, we've already overspent
what we've budgeted.
So I would propose that we, that we budget in
full for what we think will really spend.
And I think that will be a part of just
reducing the tension.
In, within a given fiscal year between our revenue and,
and, and what we think we're going to spend.
Another example is electricity. This is a big one for
our district. It is a major unknown because we get
charged.
Charged for all electricity after the fiscal year ends. So
we won't really know what that bill is until.
July or August or so.
But we can very clearly see when I'm looking through
our accounts, an FY 23.
Overspent FY 24 overspent by over 200,000 FY 25.
Overspent by over 165,000 and I'm predicting.
And for this fiscal year, we budgeted, you know, even
less than what we actually spent in FY 25. So
it's just very unrealistic.
So I'm predicting that we will be overspent to the
tune of round 360 or so.
And again, we'll find out when the year truly ends,
but it has been a really cold winter.
And also we've budgeted for less than what we actually
spent. So, so an FY 27.
The costs are just more in line with actuals and
the kind of increases that we see.
And then with those examples in mind, I think it's
just worth noting that we are in the context.
Of no savings buffer. Okay. So if we had a
savings buffer,
we could take a little more risk. We could be
a little more optimistic.
Okay, but we don't have that.
So when we try to squeeze out non personnel costs.
Okay, will you try to like, oh, reduce them, you
know, get them as low as we can.
With that ends up doing is putting us in deficit
because there's nothing to back, nothing to back it up.
And then that leads to personnel losses in a following
fiscal year. So I would really, I am trying to
convey that by.
Fully costing out non-personal expenses. We are ultimately proje protecting
jobs in future years.
So that's my thesis.
And, and that's why along the way, there, there are
these, you know, noticeable increases.
Increases. And I'm saying, I think it we're just more
realistic.
Okay.
That's it for that one, you can go to the
next slide. .
And then just as a reminder,
top of mind for me is the future years that
we have.
And again, I, I think that this year is.
Does a good job at resetting our path financially as
absolutely painful as that is.
But it doesn't solve all of our core problems.
Problems, our labor costs do increase.
By a higher than 6% rate. So we have to
be very precise and careful.
About how we manage things during FY 27, utilities are
increasing at high rates, and then we've got the boiler
issue to think about. And our debt service will definitely
increase by a few hundred thousand based on the athletic
turf. Again, we have one interest payment this year, but
we'll have another.
Interest in another principle next year. So we know these
things are ahead of us.
And so I just urge us all to keep that
in mind.
As we make decisions.
Decisions. Thank you. Mm-hmm .
You can go to the next slide.
Okay. So overall we do believe that this budget allows
us to continue to support student learning and outcomes it's
been developed over the past four months.
It is very focused on fiscal.
Responsibility and sustainability. The goal here is that we don't
end up in a freeze next year.
Your, and despite all the challenges of the PR of
the prior slide, it is, it is very important to
us that we try to avoid.
Reductions and such into FY 28. I can't predict that
at this time it will really depend on our decisions.
Decisions that we make into FY 27, but that is,
I think that's what we all want.
Is for this to have been, you know, the worst
of it.
And again, this is the smallest year to year operating
increase.
In the past five years.
I'm open to questions unless that's.
That's not any questions from board members, member, feller, and
then member Dowling. I apologize. I have seven questions.
Questions could, could we go one at a time? Yeah,
definitely one at a time. Okay. I just wanna make
a general statement. I, I'm starting to think about our
situation as a budget crisis that we're inheriting a real
mess. And so I'm just gonna use that like language
going forward. Other people don't have to.
Do that with me, if they don't want to.
Okay. What percentage of local tax increase does this budget
represent? Is it still 6.0%? Yes, this is we're still
at the 6%. Okay. Got it.
I assume that there has not been an update on
the state funding formula.
Not to my knowledge. Okay.
How much in total cost savings does this 50 basis
point reduction I've been waiting all week to say basis
point.
Reduction in the health insurance rates.
That provided about 52,000 in wiggle room. Mm-hmm so,
so only $52,000.
In retained dollars because it went from 12 to 11
and a half percent. Yes.
Okay. Yeah, every percentage point it's not linear because it's
a percentage, but it's.
It's every percentage difference is roughly a hundred thousand.
Like broadly, roughly what's the cost savings associated with
taking a director role in putting it as an instructional
specialist.
N
not very much. So it's roughly equivalent. You would say.
Maybe 20 to 30,000. It's not broadly 20 to 30,000.
Maybe, maybe because the instructional role is gonna have base
pay plus other extras in their contract.
Could do you think you could get us a revised
number on that?
Have you
is, is the assumption on transportation costs due to gasoline
the same as it's been throughout our budget season, or
have you updated it with higher diesel costs?
No. I mean, I had a, I feel like I
had a healthy increase on gasoline, but I haven't updated
it in the last two weeks.
Okay. Yeah, that might be take yeah. Into your prior
question. It, it, it's gonna have to be around 20
to 30,000, but it would depend on where N S
PTA member comes in on their lane and steps. Got
it. Which can vary pretty widely. So it, it depends.
Depends.
Okay, next question is about the school resource officers.
Officers, which is line item 31 32.
So it looks like the school.
Or the, the police department paid.
In financially year twenty twenty six, a hundred fifty 8,000.
And we're assuming that next year, the costs of those
two SROs goes to 220,000 mm-hmm . So it's like
a $60,000 increase. So.
Why the $60,000 increase.
For the resource officers. Yeah. The original figure should be
191,000. We've we did fix that, but I, I think
the person who brought that up.
We get that, that is a cost estimate. That's provided
by the city. So we are told this is how
much it'll be for the two police officers. At 85%
effort, we enter the number they provide to us.
So, but we feel pretty confident in the 220,000 for
the two. Oh yeah. No, it is a figure provided
to us by the city, by the city. Okay. Got
it. Yeah.
Thanks for putting the electricity costs up there. And it's
really interesting because it sounds like the solar panels on
the middle school are doing tremendously well.
And are greatly reducing electricity costs there, you would think
so, but our costs include the solar power credits.
Credits they include the solar, solar power credits. So I
I'm. Yeah. Do, do you.
Is there any ballpark figure on the savings from those
panels that.
Have
because I, the reason I ask is because.
The other six schools don't have solar panels on top
of them. Mm-hmm and I wonder if the administration
had considered that.
And something we could take up on building a grounds.
I mean, we get the, we get like a.
A complex costing estimate from the city. It includes the
solar credits and then they're applied to.
All buildings and there's a proportional amount applied to the
school. So they have a special formula for how that
works out.
But, but it, yeah, our costs include that, oh, the
credits score to the city.
I think there's more to it. I'll have to. It's
complicated. Okay. We'll we'll, we'll take a look that those
are all my questions. Mm-hmm thank you, member dialing.
Thank you. My question was also about electricity. I, I
appreciate the numbers about.
The, the spending versus
the the budget and I can.
I can only imagine how.
Frustrating that is to not get your bill until.
You know the end of the year, like that's
yeah, no, it, no, it's it. I think it's pretty
maddening. I mean, I've, I've asked for like, can we
get this quarterly? Can we get this in another way?
Mm-hmm .
I would love a different.
Setup for that billing. Yeah.
Do we know
has our usage.
Also been going up or is it more of an
issue of supply cost is going up? Delivery cost is
going up. Mm-hmm .
I don't know. I I'd have to take a look
at.
The I'd have to take a look at some of
those.
Building schemes that we get through the years.
I mean, I've seen the FY 25. I've seen the
FY 26 and I've seen our FY, our new one
that we're, that we have estimated.
But, I mean, I think you, you know, in your
household bill, like.
I'm sure you've paid more for your electricity, especially this
winter.
So I, I think it, it still makes sense.
That it's a lot more whe whether we know it's
due to usage.
Or the supply costs or the delivery piece or, or,
you know, mm-hmm, .
Right. And it's just a lot more delivery. We have
no control over. I, I guess I'm, I'm just.
And this is not mission critical for tonight. I'm just
wondering if, if we can, at some point.
Take a peek deeper into those numbers and make sure
there isn't some.
Phantom electrical loads at some of our buildings that are
driving our usage way up. Mm-hmm .
Thank you. Yeah.
Other questions.
Questions that member Richardson. Don't don't look hesitant. Oh, sorry.
Hello.
So in general.
Our supplies are up because we unbudgeted previous years. Like
that's kind of like, that's the short, I think that's
a reasonable theme that works for most of these increases.
There's also just, there's some areas of our budget that
like,
they were like zeroed out in FY 26 in the
budget piece, but we definitely spend there. Yeah. So I
put them back. Yeah.
That makes sense. It ma it makes sense. I mean,
I'm on the finance committee. I know.
You are putting numbers where numbers have not been before.
So, but, but they do belong there, although it's really
sad.
It's really sad to think about too.
The, so you mentioned, I mean, essentially our no, you
know, and our EST, we are sort of overestimating.
Because I think what you're saying is.
We have no fund balance.
To, to support an underestimation. Right. Is that another way
of saying you said something like, not quite, I, I,
I think I'm insisting that we budget.
As realistically as possible. I am.
Not budgeting things, buffer, buffer is what you were saying.
Yeah. So what do you mean by that? Yeah, well,
there's nothing to.
Draw, like there's nothing to draw from, right. No fun
balance. Exactly. Right. Right. So.
I, I am insisting that we avoid all temptation to
budget with wishful thinking.
I don't, you know what I mean? Disagree. I don't
disagree. and the budget we have in front of
us tonight has no fun balance in it.
Still that is correct. Yeah. We would have to yeah.
Add to it, to seed our fund balance that, yes.
Great.
Do we have any revenue opportunities?
Built into this budget for next year.
Not built into the budget. I I, or like, how
do you, I'm I'm sure I'm using the wrong kind
of accounting language for that, but.
I mean, there's a chance we can rent out Kayla.
Kahler. Yeah. I'm not building that in because of course
I haven't seen that happen yet. And I'm refusing to
be optimistic. Right. I cuz I want us to have
a budget that we will land in the black with
and not have.
The kind of issues we're gonna, you know, that we
have this year.
So there's Kayla there's.
Auditorium rental revenue that is variable.
We have a contract with Portland, for our buses.
Buses, some work that we do for them. Can you
talk that, can you talk that through a little bit?
What that contract with Portland?
Metro looks like
yeah, I might bring Mike up to talk a little
bit.
But you don't have to, you just it's. Okay. Don't
worry.
Off the cuff. Well, you gotta be the guy, right.
You're the bus guy. rehearse for this other things
too. But.
We we support the Mike Nally director of operations and
safety.
We have two mechanics.
Mechanics, one of which is charged with supporting the south
Portland fleet. And then one of which is charged with
supporting the Portland fleet. We are in the process of
right-sizing that contract. Last time it was updated was 2017.
So I am working with my peer at Portland to.
Update those numbers.
Order. Yep. So
that's that's what I would say about that. So how
is that translate to revenue?
So we, we get reimbursed for.
The mechanic that works on their buses. Got it. We
reimburse for his salary. They reimburse us for the parts
that are used on their buses. And those numbers are
low right now because they reflect 2017 numbers. Not, not
currently. Oh, you? Yeah. That's how like a priority.
Yes. I agree. Okay.
Can we have an update on when that is completed?
As a board. Absolutely. Okay. Yep. Thank you.
The, the skill, the skill. And I don't know, maybe
this is you, Mike, but.
You know, the skill and boiler issue.
We all know is an issue.
But as I understand it, and maybe this is just
too small of a problem, but one, you know, one
of the RA, one of the, there is a, a,
a long list I think, of, of, of.
Either school buildings or
municipalities in Maine that are kind of waiting for grant
funding to support kind of infrastructure.
Costs are we have we put skill in into that
queue?
No, but we are trying to stay aware of any
opportunities like that for funding. And if, if something's up,
if you know of something that's up, we would, I
believe, I believe that there is a, I be, I
be, I mean, I, Joe, maybe, you know, a little
bit more about how this worked with the middle school.
But I believe
we just have to get on a list somewhere. I
that's what I've heard through with other talking to other
people in other school districts, correct. There is a process
to apply for state funding for significant construction projects. There's
a, also some, sometimes the state will put out revolving
renovation funds.
We have not entered onto.
A state construction project.
Funding cycle. And as far as I know, there is
nothing open for new revolving renovations.
But I think that's certainly.
I know throughout this process, things have come up. Like
what if we had a master elementary school?
Campus. Yeah, that would be something that we would have
to kind of undertake as a, as a project. But
it's certainly something that we could, could talk about.
As we move forward from this budget cycle.
But the skill and boiler is what outta scope of
that.
Or correct when for a school construction.
Project. It tends to be at scale for either like
significant reconstruction or like a full.
Rebuild as in the case of the middle school. Okay.
Revolving renovation.
Funds tend to be the place.
Where you can do.
A different sort of repair cycle and upgrade cycle.
It's usually about every two years over the last six
years that the state puts out kind of a competitive.
Application process. So that certainly could fall within that. If
the board chose to not go the route of a
local bond or.
Kind of another initiative.
I mean, can we do, can we is so who
monitors?
Monitors that when that who's responsible for monitoring those opportunities.
I, I mean, we all get various.
List serves and sort of cross check those opportunities.
Right now. Okay. There hasn't been something, but certainly, I
mean, we are always looking for those opportunities. Great.
Thank you.
A couple more questions. So.
The SRO role mm-hmm why doesn't the city.
Pay those salaries. I think the main reason is just
that they're not our employees. Like they're police department employees.
They work over here.
So we pay for that service.
If the inverse were true, if a school employee were
working at the police department, which would not happen, but
imagine if it did, we would expect payment in return
for that effort.
Well,
sure in normal circumstances, that makes sense. But mm-hmm,
Garrn budget crisis as member feller was saying. So this
seems like potentially something.
Worth talking about with the city.
I think it's worth talking about.
So we can add it to our list of things
we wanna talk about with city council.
I guess add it to the list. Okay. Yeah. Mm-hmm
.
The insurance adjustment, the $52,000.
Like mm-hmm that is back in our, where did,
where did that go? Mm-hmm and I know you
mentioned this the other night, but it went right outta
my brain. So I no, 30,000 went back to capital.
Costs for facilities, cuz I'm still.
They're they're a little bit undercut from what they're really
asking for. The big one is there's a $700,000 estimate
for these chimney stacks that need to be.
Replaced or refurbished at the high school.
It's something that's been deferred for many years. They're saying
they need it. Now, if we don't address it, it's
things will deteriorate cause mold, et cetera.
I've already told them they need to.
Be efficient, get quotes, try to find something less.
So where there's a little bit, I.
Tried to fund a little bit more toward, towards that
project.
Okay, thank you. My last, my last question. Oh, sorry.
The stipends for that fall under the assistant superintendent's office,
those appear to not just be for one person, they
appear to be.
And this was a question you answered through the, the
queue today.
8,900 in stipends for our equity leaders.
20,000 plus for certification committee.
23,000 for K12 to K eight vertical leaders. That doesn't
just seem like that's all going into the pockets of.
Pocket of misprints. It's those it's just falls for whatever
reason it falls under.
The assistant superintendent's stipends.
Stipends, not a single penny of that is related to
my salary. It is a, it, it has to do
with the fact of how we divide up sort of
where different.
Stipends that are in schedule B, which is our contractually
negotiated stipend rates. Some of those are as associated with
a building-based.
Summer associated with athletics.
Athletics some in curriculum and there are some that fall
under the umbrella of my office. So that's why they
show up in that cost center.
Given the, sort of the scope of the work that
they're doing.
There are
that probably represents funding.
For about 20 different teacher leadership roles. Okay.
That are, that are funded, just sort of under the
umbrella of my office, but none of it is related
to my salary. Thank you for clarifying that.
Joe, you may need to stay up here for this,
but you know, one of the.
One, you know, one of the consistent areas of feedback
we've heard.
Is, you know,
right sizing.
Director roles and
you know,
essentially.
I am really struggling.
With how that has been accomplished.
Given
and I think this is just a matter of trying
to understand what these new roles would look like and,
and how they would function and operate differently than the
director roles. But.
It essentially just seems like responsibilities. The same responsibilities have,
have, have somewhat moved from one.
Line item to another.
Where I think the point.
Of right sizing. Some of these director roles was to
try to bring back some really effective teacher roles that
we lost in this reduction in force.
And we're not able to do that.
With
with the proposal in front of us.
So I'd really like to hear the case.
For
and maybe my, you know, like, I'd like to hear
the case for that. I'd like to understand what the
roles are.
Is it really a shifting, is it really just moving
responsibilities from one cost center to the other? Is it
not that.
You know, everybody in this community.
Prior is a lot of us are prioritizing those, teach
those student.
Facing roles. We've lost some incredibly effective student facing roles
with this reduction in force.
And now we've created these other roles to move over
to the teacher.
Pool and, and are they gonna be interacting with students
and how are, how do we plan for those roles
to.
To be, you know, kind of filling.
Gaps that we've lost on.
The reduction in force side with the teachers and staff.
Sure I can speak a little to that. And then
maybe the superintendent might want to add to that our
instructional strategist roles. I think I spoke about this before.
It's a model that has worked in special education for
a number of year.
Those folks are working within a teaching contract.
They have leadership.
Responsibilities, but they do not have supervision and evaluation.
Responsibilities to their colleagues.
So they act in partnership and.
Much more of a coach.
Role. So as a student or as a teacher might
be working to kind of figure out a new.
Behavior plan for a student.
The instructional strategist brings in.
Expertise to partner with the teacher.
They could be in the classroom helping to model.
A new behavior plan or a, you know, doing a
whole class lesson.
On regulation strategies.
So it's, it's done through a different model than a,
than a director or a coordinator is.
But the majority of their day you are correct is
not a hundred.
Percent doing instruction.
To students it's really building.
The staff capacity and teacher capacity.
Oftentimes those instructional strategists also might sit in.
A meeting with a, a special education team with ed
techs and teachers to kind of think about a, a
complex student or a situation or.
A set of behaviors that need support. So.
Again, as we looked at how.
To retain leadership in some key areas that felt like
the appropriate move to the administration team.
But you're certainly correct. There, there are many decisions that,
you know, have to be made.
I don't know if the superintendent would like to add
anything. I think to that, I, I think the important
piece is.
That those positions are actually creating.
More capacity with, through teachers, the work that they're doing
with teachers.
Teachers and we believe that's a, a pretty effective way.
To be able to reach more kids.
So
can you just ex I mean, since you're talking about.
The
so how is what you just described different than what
the assistant.
Director for special ed. Let's just use that as an
example.
Does in their day-to-day.
Sure I there there's certainly. And is it different? There
are certainly are some similarities.
Typically, however,
we have
when we think about hosting IEP meetings.
Meetings for student students. There's sort of a, a way
that we think about who's going to chair and lead
that work.
Based on the decisions that be need to be made
in that meeting.
So a standard meeting where a child.
Is kind of continuing with the same plan. There might
be some minor updates.
Updates that might be the kind of IEP meeting that
instructional strategist would leave.
Lead excuse me, as we.
Kind of grow on the level of risk and challenge
for the complexity of the case and thinking about students
who are in out of district placements.
Or potentially
you know, a more contentious situation.
Or there's new costs to be considered.
Those are IEP meetings that typically get allocated to a
building-based administrator or to one of our special education.
Administrators. So again, there's some division of responsibilities.
That way.
And then, you know, the, the team of administrators will
also need to think about.
Some of the administrative tasks that wouldn't move into the
teaching contract.
Around
transportation payment. All, all of those pieces.
Of kind of program oversight that directors do.
I'll I'll I have more questions, but I'd like my
colleagues to take some of the air up.
They would like any other questions member Holman? Well, I,
I appre actually I appreciate this line of questioning a
lot. Thank you very much Eleni. And.
I, I guess I did have that same feeling that
you expressed that.
That if changes were made in the, in, in administra,
in administrative cuts that we would see.
Money come back. And so that was, that's been a
surprise and.
I will. I listened with interest to hear those things.
Because we have, we've lost some positions that are very
important.
And so I'm
I'm, you know, I expected, I expected to see money
that where there were cuts made in one place, money
would be liberated in another. And that's been disappointing. I
must say.
Other questions.
Questions you have questions? I do, but if I, I
want to, you don't go ahead. It's.
It's okay.
Just a process question. Is anyone in the central office
getting transcripts from the meeting recordings and generating a list
of follow-up items?
Transcripts of these meetings that we said, I'm just trying
to make sure I heard transcripts of these meetings. No.
No. Okay. I don't have a transcript. That's a very
easy thing to do. I will do it if no
one else wants to do it, but you know, the
ability of software to generate a summary of our conversation
and then identify action. Item is like some something we
apps absolutely need to be doing.
As we move through reconfiguration. So I just wanna say
that.
Okay. I have a couple questions, budget questions.
Questions have we budgeted for paint and drywall supplies this
summer? So I did visit all the schools this year.
Some are in better condition than others. I will say.
Skill and really needs a new coat of paint.
The wall above the stairs next to the high school
auditorium is like some peeling paint too. So I, I
just wanna make sure that we have.
Accounted for that. I mean, I have the budget request
from our director of facilities. It includes.
Includes many such projects. I feel like I remember painting.
I.
I can't immediately recall if drywall was on.
That list, but I know there's a lengthy list of
repairs.
Repairs in, in all facets of the buildings. These are
aging buildings and it's, I know it's top of mind
for him.
Great. Are there any possibilities for restructuring the debt? You
know, I know that we're gonna pay an extra 3000
or 300,000 in debt costs next year. So.
Worth a look, it it's worth a look. I'm happy
to ask the city more about that.
I mean, as it stands now.
You know, we've, we've taken out the loan. We have
our payments to pay back.
But I can certainly ask the city about that moving
forward, if that's even an option. Okay. That might be
a good thing to talk to. 'em about when we
go back and talk to them. Mm-hmm yeah. I've
forgot some questions or reconfiguration.
So maybe Joe wants to take those.
We're we're trying to focus questions on the budget right
now, but reconfiguration is the budget right now. Yeah. Oh,
okay. Do you have questions?
Member Richardson. Yes.
Yeah. I mean, I'm, I, I don't, I don't disagree
with what member feller was saying if, I mean, this
budget.
Was designed for a school closure.
With redistricting and or reconfiguration.
I mean, we've cut 25% of our NSS roles. And
my ex the explanation I got is reconfiguration is kind
of why. So I think, I think we should hear
what member Fowler has to say.
Yeah, no. And, and yeah, I, I I'd, I'd I'd
like to hear that's fine. Did you have any other
questions? I do have other questions. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Go
ahead, member feller, but, but I'll let member feller do
his thanks. You know, I'll try to be relatively quick
on this. I mean, so the first is just, I,
I want to hear about this change management process for.
Reconfiguration, like, do we have a timeline? Do we have
a racy matrix? And for those who don't know what
that is like you assign who's responsible, who's accountable, who's
consulted and who's informed.
And parents
are surely gonna be consulted in this.
Yeah. So do we, do we have that kind of
planning, I guess?
Yep. We, we do have that.
In development.
And what it needs now is some of those stakeholder
voices to, to check, to make sure that everything is
represented there. I think hopefully the community saw that on
Tuesday we sent out notice of the 13 upcoming listening
sessions.
Sessions that will happen for, at each of the schools
for staff, they will also happen at each of the
schools.
For for families will host one here.
In this space before the next board meeting that anyone
is welcome to.
And then we're gonna do two online as well to
try and increase.
Access in addition, we opened up kind of an open-ended.
Questions and survey for families.
As of the other day, when I looked we'd already
had about 200 and it wasn't just families. Excuse me.
It was also staff. We had about 200.
Folks who had started to, to ask their questions.
Questions. We
are using that to sort of help guide where's the
heat map of the issues.
Issues the, the sort of workflow that we anticipate.
Is first
identifying the building leadership.
For the new configuration.
Tomorrow a survey is going out to every member of
our elementary school staff.
To seek their preference.
On what is both their certification?
And their, their preference. What do they value in a
team?
So that we can collect that kind of input as
we are thinking about, cuz the next phase of this
will be identifying the staff teams. That is the going
to, I think be one of the most important things
to identify that early so that teams can be working.
Collaboratively and
have the maximum amount of time.
At the same time.
We are, have a group of folks who are meeting
to look at the student.
Demographics and kind of the geography of the student placement.
And that piece we've been meeting with the transportation company.
So those that's sort of the, the early plan we
hope by the end of next week to be able
to publish.
A more formal timeline to give the community.
Both a sense of what are the phases and then
when can they expect to hear.
Because that's one of the most important things that we
can do, even if there's minor shifts, knowing that every
two weeks you're, whatever it is that we decide that
you're going to get an update is really important when
you're going through a change process.
So the building
administrators have already begun and are.
Working pretty much every day to, to start building out
the plan. That's great. So that, that, it sounds like
there's a lot of thought being put into reconfiguration.
And how the central office is gonna move through it.
So.
You know, one
spec, one question I really have burning is these attendance
boundaries like that is the central.
Like, there's an, an absolute information vacuum right now. Mm-hmm
that a lot of parents are really, really struggling
with. And I think a super common concern is, are
you gonna take my child and bust them across the
city? Is my kid gonna be on a bus for
45 minutes a day? So like, could you speak to
that concern?
And just talk about like,
how are we making the decision about where kids go
to school? Are we maintaining walkability? Is it constrained on
geography?
Or are we, do we have other goals?
Sure. It's a very understandable, and we, we wanna be
able to provide information.
We also, and this is really where I am.
Very eager to focus the family listening sessions around what
are the priorities in our community.
That, that parents and caregivers bring to the table.
That needs to be at the center of how we
do this work.
So again, I don't want to get ahead of hearing
those voices.
You know, in particular next week is where the bulk
of those sessions. Those are absolutely open to the, to
the public and to the board as well.
And folks, if, if you don't go to, if you
don't have children at brown school, you can still go
to the brown school session.
It's just, we wanna host them in each of the
neighborhoods.
Neighborhoods. I'm also working with our director of multilingual programs
to think about some specific outreach to multilingual.
Families around their priorities.
And then I'd like to work with our special ed.
Team to identify.
A focus group or a setting for parents, with children
with IEPs, especially those in self-contained settings to really hear
their voices.
Around
what's important to them.
Both about that transition and also about the, the sort
of the new model that we're in. That's great.
And I'll just be bef I'm all set, but I
just wanna say, like, it sounds like you guys have
done a tremendous amount to get us ready for this
very.
Challenging change.
But you, I haven't heard enough from the central office
about.
All of this, like you guys have clearly thought about
it.
And I think people want to hear about that thinking
so that, that's just my only piece of advice. Sure.
Appreciate the feedback. And we will work to.
To provide more information. We've set up a page on
the website called elementary reconfiguration roadmap.
That we, we will start to build out the documents
and again,
each time community members write to us. I read every
one of those emails to hear what is on folks'
minds. And it's incredibly helpful.
Because it's, there are a variety of issues that feel
most important to different families and different stakeholders.
Nice member Richardson.
Thank you, Joe.
A really quick, just to piggyback off of that.
So who will be attending from the district? Those community
engagement, listening sessions.
Sessions. Sure. So I will be.
Facilitating most of them, the principle of the school that
it's at.
Will be joining me as a co-facilitator for that. And
then we'll have other district admin or school-based admin.
Also they're for kind of note taking so that.
Myself and the school principal can fully be engaged with
the participation.
I heard you're doing a survey to staff tomorrow.
Yep. But are you going to be doing similar?
Listening sessions with staff and yeah, the staff sessions all
happen next week as well. Okay. Those are scheduled or
next two weeks, those are scheduled.
In the, the morning time for staff to drop in.
We do recognize it as elementary school conference time.
So, what we are planning in the next two weeks
is our, our, our first set of this, knowing that
there, there needs to be more. And that's why we
also opened up the digital form. Thank you. Yep. Okay.
I'm gonna go back to the dreaded list of staff.
We've cut.
So the, you know, we.
13 elementary.
Teachers are no longer.
Employed.
And we are. I think what I've seen is projections
for.
Capping like capped class sizes to comply with our.
Policy. Yep.
And I pushed on this a little bit in a
question to you all today.
And the response I got was that.
Was that
well referencing the main.
Statute.
So, which is higher than our policy.
So children are gonna arrive in south Portland. We have
Aran, you know, there is a transient population here that
is a reality.
They're gonna show up.
That kindergarten class is gonna be 20 kids. It's gonna
send that class into 21 and or 22, and we're
gonna be.
Out of compliance with our policy.
In south Portland. So, so what, what happens.
When that happens because it will happen. sure. And
I, I think it's, I think it's important to note
that.
It has happened over the course of this year that
there have been classes we've been under, but we've been
under.
I mean, my understanding is we've always, we've been way
under what our policy.
Correct. But what I'm saying is, is there are particular
classes in the district.
Right now. Yep. That are at, or one student.
Above the policy. Okay. Because of just that there's a
single student that moves in.
And so that makes sense.
We also have had times in south Portland prior to
my arrival here, where we did have to close, like.
Kayla cannot accept any more kindergartners. Right? So even if
you're in that neighborhood, right, you attend kindergarten at a
different school.
So I think certainly that can be part of it.
Right now the
we have capacity to, to meet the need. You are
absolutely correct that if we have a sudden influx of.
Students like we did three years ago.
That we will have new challenges to face.
But again, I, I feel confident that we do have
structures to address that.
I'm not sure if there's more that I can provide
there. Yeah. UN understood. Do you have a policy?
That is helping you.
Like we don't have anything written. And, and I think
we've had an exchange about this. So I'm trying to
like, bring this out into the public, but.
We don't have anything in our policy.
That says
class sizes can't exceed. Can't have more than 50% of
IEPs in a classroom. Right.
So, how are we gonna manage that with these larger
class sizes, knowing that.
That just more children. Like we ha more kids have
IEPs these days.
So
how are we, how are we being mindful?
About about that to not.
I, I really worry about the stress on our teachers
with these larger class sizes. Sure. So,
sure. And I think
that is going to be incredibly important for us to
pay attention to.
And there are certain grade bands at some of our
schools right now.
Where there is a 50% of the students in that
grade level.
Do have IEPs. And so we're currently managing that you're
right. That the class size might not be as large.
And so again, that is something that we will need
to attend to. I think, a consideration.
That
the board can make, or is also.
What role and how do we.
Use our regular education ed techs, all of the schools
for next year are.
Scheduled to have regular education. Ed techs, ed techs, two
and three can work under the direction of a teacher.
And there is the ability for those folks to help.
Provide small group instruction, whether it's dividing up a large
class.
I do also think that.
One of the benefits of reconfiguration is.
When you have
a hundred grade, three students and five teachers.
Teachers, there are different ways that you can group those
kids right. Than when there's.
There's two teachers and a grade span.
Of reading levels that stretches 10 grades. Yeah. And so
I think we really have the ability to think about
when and where do we.
Group kids with similar skills.
When do we group them with diverse skills?
And I think that's the sort of work that our
educators.
Educators. I I'm, I'm hopeful to engage with them on
because that sort of work around how do we match
kids, where they're at with their learning.
Is really exciting and
we have so much more ability to do that with
a team of teachers in a building.
And, and we can't, I mean, we have, I don't
think it's legal.
To place kids at certain schools based on.
Need in terms of education, like I E P need.
Right. So you're just, I mean, I assume it's not,
cuz that seems discriminatory.
But the an I E P.
Can depending on a child's programming, if a child.
Needs a functional life skills. Sure. And there's not one
in their sure. Local school, then the IEP can place
them there.
But in terms of
kind of outside of that parameter.
No, we are public schools. We take everyone, but it's
not gonna, but that's not going to influence the way.
We draw boundaries, right? Like we can't, I, I don't.
Don't I, I don't see. I think there's a number
of reasons why that would be challenging. And also we
have to remember that we are trying to draw boundaries,
not just for next year's group of kids. Exactly. But
exactly. We want this to have consistency moving for forward
as well. All right.
Thanks. Yep.
Thank you. Other questions.
Questions member Holman.
So this is going back to the budget.
Actually budget and also ID, I guess. Anyway.
There we've had some questions raised about.
The the way bus drivers are gonna be asked to.
Help out in the middle of the day, potentially.
And
it's been suggested that that may be something that's really
has to be decided through their contract.
And so that's not something that could be implemented anytime
soon. Right?
I don't know when the contract, I mean, what, or,
or could only be implemented on a certain timeline, I
guess is what I mean.
Sure. I think we had some similar questions to this
the other night in terms of what's the meet and
consult process.
And then when that process.
Ends. What does impact bargaining look like when there is
a change in working conditions?
So again, that is, that is something that we'll have
to move through that process.
With the association, we've already begun it with the service.
Employees.
So, so, so it may, so, but those negotiations may
not. It's hard to say how those negotiations would go.
Correct. And their
again, there could be an implication for if there is
a.
An impasse that we can't reach, then we have to
look somewhere else.
For further reductions, right? Because we wouldn't be coming back
to.
The, to the board for additional dollars. So if we
are not able to.
To reach agreement.
Then that may mean that we need to make further.
Reductions somewhere else. Whether, you know, obviously we would look
first at non personnel.
But I think our finance director is helping us be
aware of that risk as well.
Ready for the questions for right now? That's okay.
Other questions.
Questions not member Fowler. I have some more questions. I
just need a second to find them.
Can I ask just a quick follow up to the
bus driver question? Yeah, absolutely. What is the cost?
Like let's say that negoti, that, that negotiation process, I
know that's the wrong word, but that process fails.
Fails. What is, what, what are, what's the amount.
Of dollars that we would need to, I mean, sure.
If we were seeking to restore.
Five full-time custodial positions to the budget. That would be
about 320,000.
If we are looking for.
A shorter duration, you know, not a full-time role, but
a shorter role than obviously that would.
Change in the scope.
So, and is it custo I'm sorry, is it custodial
duties or is it the lunch monitoring duties? Like it
was the, the idea.
Was that
to explore bus drivers, being able to help with the
setup and breakdown of the lunchroom at the elementary schools.
Because all of those lunchrooms also serve as a classroom
for the gym.
Teacher. And so there needs to be set up and
breakdown. It's not a dedicated.
Cafeteria space, like the tables, the tables. Yep. Okay. And
then also making sure then the floor is clean afterwards.
So PE class can begin on time. Yep.
So, so again, the
the idea we wanted to explore was.
Bus drivers who were not assigned to that midday time.
Was there the potential there? Yeah.
And who's our, who, who we, we have no longer
of EdTech one S.
We have, I know we couldn't fill all the lunch
aid positions.
Positions, who's going to be lunch, playing the role of
lunch aid.
So, again, depending on the school, that schedule looks different
building.
Administrators are often doing lunch duty. There are, there are
teachers and ed techs who.
Have regular and routine duties.
Throughout there. We need to ensure that we meet our
contractual obligation, that those employees get there.
Break. But again, I, I think.
That model is already working. Okay. In some of our
schools. Okay. That have neither ed tech ones nor.
Lunch aids. Okay.
Sorry, Daniel, you can go. Yep. That's okay. Member feller.
Okay. Do we have a cost estimate on how much
it would cost to move the portables?
Portables again. I, we have not explored that as something
that.
We're currently looking at right now.
Because you think they should be at small or just.
I mean, they are literally portables, so you can move
them at any time with some money.
So it seems like that gives us great optionality.
Sure in the reconfiguration.
They'd it has not been part of the equation thus
far. We've been looking at it as part of that.
That campus's footprint. Yeah. So, and they're, and they're nice
portables. I went to middle school in a portable and
it was great.
Okay.
So for Abigail.
Typical high performing school districts in Maine.
How much are they allocating to their fund balance every
year?
Ooh, I'd have to ask them all. I mean,
I mean, it's a great question. I mean,
what I've seen just from the Portland press Herald and
reading articles about this IC district's.
Spending their fun balance actually to meet their operational costs.
Which is a choice, but it is a choice that
comes with big risks.
Risks. Isn't a choice and it depends on.
You know, the level of risk that involves depends on
how much fun balance they have to start with how
much they would have left.
Their likelihood of going into deficit with their current year's
annual costs.
It it's a, it's a complex choice to make, and
it needs to be made very carefully.
So I think your best positioned.
To consider how much
we should try to put it into our fund balance.
In in every year.
You know, our books quite well, you know, the variance,
right? Like you have some.
Idea of some unexpected cost on average in our district.
What might that be?
I mean, I, I think a good rule of thumb
would be just to follow the city's minimum and maximum
thresholds.
Thresholds that was very carefully thought through. I think that's
pretty reasonable. I think it's nine to 12%. So a
minimum of 9% of your operating costs.
Should be, you should have that in savings have at
least 9% of your annual operating costs in your fund
balance.
Yeah, we don't have it. I mean, that, that, yeah,
it, it would be.
Significant it would cover you if mm-hmm catastrophe strikes.
That's the idea. Mm-hmm, , it's a lot, we've been
extremely negligent.
Sorry, we've been extremely negligent.
In the past, having spent all that.
Yes. Okay. So
the question to Rosemarie, like.
We should for the next agenda, maybe an agenda item.
For consideration on what our policy might be. I, I.
Dr. Prince has already spoken about that. That would begin
with the policy committee, so, okay. Great. Policy committee would
bring a recommendation back to the council.
I mean to the board. Sorry.
And, and, and Dr. Prince.
Suggested that the policy committee review an idea about what
we should have for funding. Great. That's awesome.
On the list. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. Just one more question. And this is my
last question for tonight. I think.
When we're thinking about reconfiguration.
Are we prioritizing keeping
staff from buildings together.
And are we prioritizing keeping.
Classrooms together, cuz that's something I've heard a lot, obviously
from, from parents and staff.
Sure. I think I'll speak first to the staff. That's
where we're starting with a survey out to staff to
find out where they feel like.
They are able to do their best work, whether that's
in a grade Le band or a, a specific campus.
And so I think certainly.
When, when staff are working in the place that feels
like their best place, they will do their best work.
And so we want to try and maximize that.
But our buildings have an uneven distribution of.
Impacts through the reduction in force.
So we also wanna be mindful.
Of if there is a team of.
Four people existing. There's one vacancy.
Those three people have a certain way of working and
then to have someone join them.
That, that can be really challenging. So again, that's why
we're trying to figure out where preferences are.
And look for what's important to the individuals.
Individuals in terms of keeping.
Classrooms together. We
even within a school. So at skill and if there's
four kindergarten classes,
those four classes don't move forward.
As into first grade in the same configuration.
Every year we redistribute. So if there's 80 kids,
they're mixed up and maybe five of them from teacher
a.
You know, meet up with five from teacher B and
so on.
So that process happens annually in every classroom and in
every school. So I don't think we would be.
Trying to move an entire third grade of students.
Students into a single new fourth grade classroom.
We certainly want to figure out how to prioritize.
Existing social relationships and
bonding, but even in just a regular year, we wouldn't
roll a class forward like that. Got it. Thanks.
Other questions, member Richardson.
The occupational therapists.
Therapists in the reduction in force.
We're kind of filling a gap.
For roles that we, my, my understanding.
Special ed ed tech roles that we could not.
Fill
so I
the the response.
On the public.
Sorry, I'm trying to find it.
Yep. We will. Yeah. Have 3.8. Yep.
Occupational therapist next year.
We've looked at the service minutes in, you have 3.8.
I'm sorry, because we have some folks who do not
work. Full-time okay. They work 0.8, correct? Okay. Yep. We
have some people who work. Yes. That's one, that's one
human. That is one hu. It is a whole human
being that we're for days a week for us four
days. So that's great. Yes. Okay. Got it.
So
so we have looked at the service minutes.
In students' IEPs, the IEP lays out how much.
Time each child needs with an occupational therapist. We've looked
at that. We've analyzed all of the.
Schedules and believe we can meet that need.
That model of using the occupational therapists.
Therapists came about. I think it was in 2002 is
when we moved to that.
At that point, when we started that school year, we
had between 20 and 30 EdTech vacancies.
That year right now, as of today, I think we
have seven.
Special ed ed tech vacancies.
Actually, excuse me, six.
So again, I do think.
That we have been more successful in filling our ed
tech roles.
So, what we did is you're looking at me with
a question. So I think I need to explain .
Yeah. Sorry. So back in 2022,
what we did is we used the funding.
From two open EdTech roles.
To hire a full-time occupational therapist.
So sort of, it was that. Yeah. Yeah.
A different way to use the same dollars to see
if that could work. And that model again, there's been
a lot of success.
But now, as we look at our ed tech staffing
and our current OT needs, we, we do believe we
will be able to meet all of the student need
next year.
But I thought you just said we had six special
ed vacancies.
So why, why wouldn't, why did we just let go
of the equivalent of four?
Correct becau that that six is pretty standard.
For us there have been, I don't know if Connie
knows off the top of her head the last time
that we were absolutely full on our roster. I'm not
sure I've got that date on my head.
But so I, I mean, I guess I just, I
have concern. I have like real concerns about this one.
Like we've heard, we've gotten a lot of feedback.
And, and safety.
And wellbeing of children and, and, and staff are kind
of.
At risk with these cuts.
If we know we have these vacancies to me, that
means we know we need those roles filled and I
don't understand.
How we just let go the equivalent of four, of,
of, of, of six vacant rules. Sure. I just don't
understand. Sure. And I, I understand that we we've gone
down to the schedule level.
And again, with our new grade level groupings, we.
Are able to meet this need.
Kids may be working in a group of.
Two instead of a group of one or a group
of three.
That's still absolutely appropriate for providing services.
Services. And I think, you know, back to member fellows,
question around transition planning.
I think we, we know we need to get.
Our specialists.
Our teacher leaders around.
The table and talk to them about program design and
considerations.
So that we can be thoughtful with them. They're they've
got expertise here.
To make sure that we are designing from the outset,
what will be most successful?
But
have we not built into the budget? The, the, the
salaries for those six vacant special ed roles.
No, those those positions were, they were, they were rift.
Okay. So they're no longer, sorry, I guess that's I
was misunderstanding what you were saying. Okay. Yep. Those six
vacant roles. We do not, we have determined.
Based on what you just said, that those roles we
don't need anymore.
Not from the local budget. We do anticipate that we
may need to hire.
Special education ed techs for our CDs programming, but those
would not come from the local budget.
Okay.
I do have one more question. Thank you. I do
have one more question.
Cute voices up there. Could you please explain to me
the difference between a regular ed behavior strategist versus a
board certified behavior analyst? Because we just.
Re, what is that?
it's like a dying animal or something. .
We hear that like every board meeting, what is that?
I think it was a child running up and down
the hall. no, it's like, I think it's like,
it comes every time. I think it's in the pipes.
Okay.
So the, the regular ed behavior strategist role.
Was impacted.
And I, I mean, I understand that role to be
incredibly impactful.
And also very concerned about the loss of that role
given.
The way it was described to me as kind of
a conduit.
Between special ed and regular ed.
So can you just make the case for why.
The board certified behavior analyst roles.
Sufficiently cover that the loss of that resource.
Sure. So
in terms of, I think there's two different things here.
I think to keep in mind.
One is the role and the qualifications of the person
in the role. And then the other is in the
source of the funding.
Yeah. So what we have found as the.
Most impactful model for how we do behavior support.
Is folks who are funded both out of regular ed.
And out of special ed. Hmm. Because then they can
really be a partner on both sides of the continuum
for a child who might be either.
Entering into special education because of a gap in skills
or a child who might be moving out of special
education.
When someone sort of works only on one side of
that funding line. Mm-hmm it.
Restricts how we can use them.
So again, as we move into next year,
looking at the, the model that we want to use
is having.
The BCBAs, the board certified behavior.
Analysts having some allocation of their time come from regular
education.
Funding such that they can be a consult to really
be in that bridge space.
Of supporting kids and teachers.
Teachers, I think this also goes back to your earlier
question.
Around the instructional strategist.
Instructional strategists.
Can be another partner in thinking about designing behavior plans
and.
Providing expertise in that space as well.
So, again, that is our plan for how to kind
of compensate for that.
Across the, the four buildings. Okay.
Final question.
We have three building administrators at the middle school. We
have four at the high school. Do we need.
An extra one at the high school, we do not
have four at the high school. We have three people.
Well, I mean, we are, we have three people who
are part of S P a.
A and we have a Dean mm-hmm the Dean
position is a non bargaining position. Mm-hmm and that
person.
Really works around attendance. It used to be called a
student engagement.
Coordinator.
That the title shifted about two years ago.
And that person
really functions more as a multi-tiered systems of.
Support person here at the high school.
Not as a building.
Administrator. They do not participate.
Excuse me.
They do not participate in supervision.
Sorry, you have water I don't have water and
no, I'm gonna just sort of stand here for a
minute. Is there some here? Excuse me, one second.
Sorry.
Apologies. So that Dean position really functions as a multi-tiered
system of support person.
Focusing on ninth grade students and also students.
Students at risk with attendance issues. They do not participate
in supervision and evaluation of staff members, which is expected
by administrators.
So, I don't know, principal Glenn, is there anything additional
you would want to share about that role of Dean?
No, but happy to explain. There we go. Yeah. I
mean, I guess, well then what's the equi. Who's playing
that role at the middle school then.
We have
two MTSS coordinators at the middle school.
One for five, six and one for seven, eight.
Okay, then those, those two individuals work under a teacher
contract.
The role here at the high school.
Is a non bargaining contract.
Okay. I mean, I guess my question, my next question
would be, do we need two MTSS coordinators at the
middle school? If we have one Dean of students at
the high school.
Again, with the 5, 6, 7, 8 split.
That has been the okay. The.
The choice and
you know, I, I, I trust the building administrators in
terms of how they've allocated the teaching. Yeah. Resources there.
Yeah. I mean, I think these are some of the.
These are some of the concerns I have as we
hear about.
These really effective.
Teaching roles and kind of where we're able to fill
in gaps with the other existing roles.
And I just, I just don't see, that was done
at the director level.
And
and again, we're, we're losing, like we're like to, to
Claire's point, like it.
It would've been nice to have that happen so we
could kind of bring back like these beloved roles that.
That, that we, we can't, because there's no money. Like
we can't bring this percussion ed tech rollback because we.
No money was no money. Is there.
We, we, we can't bring back our computers, our entire
computer science department.
Like it it's it's I'm, I'm having a really hard
time seeing the con any concessions that were made.
To, to, to eliminate redundancies at the director level.
And I'm, I'm struggling with that in this budget.
And that's certainly
I just request that there be no clapping. Thank you.
Just appreciate it. And that certainly is a consideration.
For the board and can influence what action you take.
As you consider the proposal in front of you this
evening.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Any further questions here, member
home.
On a, on a, in a similar vein, actually, it's
kind of the same vein.
There's some things where I think we just need, I,
I understand that we have, we have both.
Operation safety, safety and facilities.
Those, that seems like a little bit of a Venn
diagram, I guess. I don't really understand.
That's another kind of question. And I, you know, I
hate, I always wanna say asking any of these questions
is horrible. No one wants to.
Including me, but why do we have those? Those sounds
like positions with a lot of overlap.
Any econ in any way to have some efficiencies there.
I think last year we went through a really long
process.
Of the board individually picking out positions to be reviewed.
I think we've tried to give you the information upfront
to make a holistic picture. We've given you all the
job descriptions.
Descriptions. I, I feel like.
On April 4th, dev you know,
speaking through the 600 positions.
Positions doesn't feel like it's going to get us.
Closer. If the board is requesting that the team go
back and make reconsiderations.
I think that's certainly within your purview.
But that might be a more productive way. And.
To to accomplish this. If you're unhappy with the budget
in front of you.
I have ******* please, just in terms of the directors,
I, I can see the list that.
Claire's accessing and there is.
One, that includes director of food service.
Director of
what is Harold buildings and grounds facilities, buildings and grounds.
Yeah. Mm-hmm and.
Tho those two, for example, those two directors are not
sort of.
The executive team level directors, they both report to Mike.
So I think we are this there's also something in
term. Am I correct?
Yes. So
there's something as well in terms of looking at a
list of directors.
Directors and recognizing that it could be food services.
Services manager, it could be buildings and grounds manager.
But these, but like through the years,
he's a titles that have, have stayed in the schools.
So, yes, there are a lot of directors.
Directors, but the key directors is really is really seven.
That that group has
I, I believe it's seven that we have now.
With the, without the D E I director and without
the.
Curriculum.
And instruction director. I think we're two seven.
Yeah, and I was just add that safety and operations
overseas transportation specifically.
And nutrition is just very distinct from facilities, which is
very distinct.
From transportation.
So the, these are very separate things.
Yep. This I, I can speak as somebody who has
been.
In a number of school districts, not just here.
Massachusetts. This is a very.
Lean group of directors for school, this size.
If that means anything.
Member feller. That is a question for superintendent Entwistle. How,
what, what do you envision as the board's role in
reconfiguration? And for example,
drawing new attendance boundaries.
I see the board as.
First off supporting the work that is being done by
the team here.
I think that
if people have a particular interest or skill and.
And strength that they can bring to certain.
Pieces of the work that we're doing. I think that's
always welcome. I know as a board member.
And, and having served for a bunch of years as
a board member and a board chair.
It, it was really important that the board.
Kind of specialize a little bit, for example, like Adrian
has, has now specialized in, he's kind of connected to
the, you know, buildings and grounds.
Grounds. And so, so I think that having people on
the board.
With special interests.
Allows them to be included. Mm-hmm .
In, in helping and supporting.
The efforts that are, that are ongoing. So.
Just have a, a more specific question. Would you know,
like a committee be appropriate, right? We are in a
sprint. We're trying to do a big thing and we
could use as many mines as possible. Is, is it
is a committee of board members a helpful thing for
this? I, I think that, I think that committees are
helpful. They it's not.
Necessarily a committee of board people, but mm-hmm, people
from the board could be on.
These committees. I, I think we've gotta be careful. And
I, I think I communicate you and I had a,
a little bit of a conversation, I guess, email conversation.
I think we have to be careful about getting too
far ahead of ourselves. I think that.
You know, I, I think the, the.
The vote to
reconfigure just, I think didn't it happen this week?
Yes. Oh, so Monday, so, so we're, we're just.
What is time? There's been a lot of thinking about
it, but there's really been.
Not, not all of the plans have been.
Fully developed and, and I do think.
Once things get
going, we are going to.
Require teachers and others to get very much involved in,
in the planning part of, of.
This it is a, it is a big.
Effort. I think we're fortunate. Dr. Prince has actually.
Been involved in something like this before, so that you
can't be that kind of experience.
But it doesn't, it does really.
You know, I think it's very important for us to,
to get those perspectives.
Perspectives and to certainly
chop off the, this work piece, it out to certain
committees that that can get some work done. And I
think that can go much quicker and be much more
effective. Yeah. And I'm not, I'm not suggesting that, you
know, the board of owns the yeah.
All I'm suggesting is like, you know, this is kind
of an all hands on deck situation.
And for it to be successful. And I really do
think reconfiguration is gonna be successful, but like you just
said, like the central office is thin here.
So we need as many talented people to contribute as
possible. And that can be parents. That can be non-parents.
Absolutely. Yeah.
Thank you. Other questions.
Questions.
I, so I think I, I had one question just
actually, oh, I'm sorry. Oh, just so I just, I
just wanna say that it is a very.
Frustrating process overall. I really respect what Joe just said
about going back and going over individual things and how
that's an issue.
I I know that's true at the same time, you
know, we can't, it it's, there's so much that's happened.
And in some ways as a board member, you do
find out things after the fact mm-hmm, , you know,
we don't decide on specifics that happen in schools and
things, but, you know, I'm very distressed about some of
the things that some of the positions are lost at
the middle school. I feel like we have to have
a, a few for forward kind of curriculum where we're,
where we're really preparing kids.
For an, the unknowns of the age of AI. And
I think our related arts positions are very important for
that. And so, and it's upsetting, you know, when you
hear those things,
it is it's really upsetting and, you know, to feel
helpless.
That, that, you know, here we are, we're faced with
this. And these important things are changing and people are
it's, it's so much people, so it's not. And some,
you know, and so that's just hard. And so, you
know, I think that it's to be expected that people
are gonna come back and say, what happened with this?
How, how could this possibly be possible?
Thank you. Other questions.
Questions. Mine was a question. I, I think that member
Richardson asked.
For member feller. I can't remember which one, but.
So I, I just didn't get the full answer.
Did did we set aside that half percent?
Savings from the health insurance.
So that we would were starting with something in fund
balance.
I mean, I know the talk was.
Depending upon what happened with.
With the health insurance rate, which we don't have yet.
But that, that, that would be a, could be a
start to putting money into our fund balance. I think
we're gonna find out the.
Actual increase in a couple weeks. And at that point,
we'll find out if we have more wiggle room than
we think right now.
Okay. And I'm just wondering that half percent that we
already reduced. Yep. That has been 12% to 11 and
a half. Yeah, no, that's been folded into all the
other changes that we've made and some additional money has
gone to facilities towards that high school chimney stacks project.
Thank you. We are at the point of public comment.
Nope. Oh, I'm sorry. Not yet. Not quite yet.
So I'm gonna, I am gonna wrap up the, oh,
sorry. Sorry. No, no, no, no problem.
I'm gonna wrap up the budget.
Update with some recommendations.
And this is my recommendations.
Tonight.
Is that the board passed this budget as presented.
Despite the challenges and understand understandable concern.
But not knowing the answer to every question. For example.
This is a strong and responsible budget.
We have made thoughtful concessions along the way, including as
recently as this week, week.
I'm urging you to move the budget forward as it
stands tonight.
With the understanding that our city council partners.
Partners remain willing to continue.
Working with us and offering further guidance to us.
And here's what they suggested.
Pass the budget.
That happened on April 2nd.
We would go and present that budget to the council
as planned on April 7th.
The board could convene a meeting, allowing the board if
inclined.
To vote to make an adjustment to that budget.
That would take us to.
April 14th, which is already scheduled.
Again, with the council.
Is a budget workshop.
On April 14th, the council.
Will then provide
financial guidance and discuss potential adjustments.
And this sequence.
And, and those decisions would be.
Essentially
whatever, whatever is decided.
That sequence could be taken care of. And then.
This the sequence, which would follow of the board and
the council.
Would then be on track for the, the council's May 4th
school budget.
Hearing and that is when they vote and send the,
the budget to public hearing.
To public referendum. That's okay. Clarifying process question. Thank you.
Yes.
Does that? So the referendum is June. Is it June 4th
or June 9th? No, June 9th.
Are there does the council's.
Council's vote have to ha like, do you need a
certain number of days?
Before the referendum? No. Okay. What you do.
Oh from oh, from the time the council? Yes. Yes.
And what, what is the number of days? I think
it's.
It's I think it's, we're talking about number five, the
main June. Yeah. So when, so it would need to
be done by May 4th.
Is that what you're asking? I'm just asking like, is
it is May 4th, the deadline that dropped dead deadline. I
think it's 30 ish day 30 requirement or something, but
Joe might be okay. So it sounds like we have
a little bit of a cushion.
Because I wanna keep doing this for the next month.
.
No, but I'm just trying to under, I just like
to understand what's what's a soft deadline and what's a
hard deadline.
And it sounds like that's a little bit of a
cushion.
I will get you that, but don't need for, okay.
I want to, I think it's 30 days, but I'm
not positive Dr. Prince and sorry, one more question. You
know, we've got.
The number three up there.
If we pass a budget tonight.
And, you know,
facts and circumstances.
Really meaning dollars somehow.
Magically appear.
We can decide as a board to come back and
reopen the budget.
Well,
I, I, I think there's a question whether the board
is what, what the board is gonna decide on.
Item two consideration and action to convene a meeting. Yep.
Is the, is the board going to decide.
That it wants to
ask for a specific amount like that. We wanna set
that tonight. Mm-hmm and that we wanna say, and to
say what we wanna do with that. Yep. So I
think it depends. Okay. What the, what the board does
and at that point, got it. Where, where we going
next? Yeah. Mm-hmm .
Okay, thank you. You're welcome.
Any other questions?
Questions. Okay.
Seeing none. We are now.
At public comment.
And the board's public comment is an opportunity.
For the board to listen to opinions of the public
that relate to school and education.
Matters on or off this evening's agenda.
The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed to
the microphone and state your name.
And the town or city where you reside.
All questions will be recorded by the superintendent.
And will be answered at the end of public comment
to the extent possible.
If answers are not available.
Someone will be assigned to reply to you. As soon
as the answer is available question, you'll be given three
minutes to speak.
There'll be no interaction between the public and the board
members.
Additionally, I would just ask that there be no clapping
booing or.
Other interruptive behavior to be allowed. And as a reminder,
school board meetings are broadcast. Live.
Recorded and posted on the city website. So please consider
the impact of your comments.
Comments. So go ahead.
Hello, my name's Nicholas Boggs. I'm a resident of south
Portland and a.
South Portland school district.
Employee
I am reading a statement on behalf of Jenna Goldstein
Walsh, who is unable to be here tonight.
Jenna is the district's elementary general.
Education behavioral specialist.
Strategist, sorry. And her position has been recommended for elimination.
I'm going to read what she wrote.
Wrote, I want to share what this role.
Actually looks like in practice.
And what it slot.
Means to our schools. I currently support four of the
district's five elementary schools.
Brown small dire and Kaler.
Kahler this year alone, I have worked directly.
With almost 60 individual.
Students over 40 of those students required.
Required formal behavior plans that I developed and oversaw.
And about 50 needed individualized, social, emotional supports that I
designed.
And helped implement to help them be successful.
In their classrooms eliminating this role.
Does not eliminate those needs.
It removes the system we have in place to respond
to them.
Right now our schools have.
A middle layer of support targeted.
Preventative interventions for students who are struggling.
But do not yet need special education services.
Services. If this role is eliminated.
That middle layer disappears.
Disappears students will either receive no meaningful behavioral.
Support in general education.
Or they will be referred for two special.
Education, there is no in between.
Special education is
significantly more expensive per student.
And about 23% of students in our district.
Nearly one in four are already identified for special education
services.
Services, which is higher than most surrounding districts.
Districts without early intervention.
That number will increase.
This decision may look like a cost savings in the
short term, but it is likely to create greater costs
over time.
Financially in terms of student outcomes, if 30 seconds.
My role is preventative.
And it is designed to be, to support students early.
Keep them in general.
Education and reduce the need for intensive.
And costly services later.
At the same time.
The district is proposing larger class sizes.
Sizes that will increase behavioral needs.
Not decrease them removing
the one role responsible that's.
It's hi, Kendra beach preschool teacher diary elementary. You see
by time.
Removing
the role responsible for addressing those needs.
Creates a mismatch between what students need.
And what the systems can provide. It is not realistic.
To expect classroom teachers.
Teachers counselors or administrators to absorb this work.
Without dedicated support interventions.
Interventions interventions will not be implemented.
Consistently and students will fall through the cracks.
Cracks these challenges.
Challenges don't just affect individual students.
Students they impact the entire classroom.
Interrupting instruction and making it harder for teachers to teach
the other students.
Students. So to learn, this is not just about one
position.
It is about whether our district is choosing a preventative
model or a reactive one. I respectfully asked the board
to consider the long-term impact.
Of this decision.
And to ask, these are some questions now.
Who will design and oversee tier.
Two and tier three MTSS.
MTSS behavioral interventions across elementary schools.
Another question.
How will we prevent an increase in special education referrals?
Referrals without early intervention. I'm sorry. Could you just read
that question again? Yeah.
How I'm helping you too. Rosemary. What's that? Oh, thank
you. Sorry, I'm trying to help go over too. So
go ahead.
How will we prevent an increase in special education?
Referrals without early.
Intervention and how
will we support students.
Students before their needs escalate.
How will the district
ensure the safety of staff.
And students when students
students become aggressive.
These are questions that will shape both students' outcomes.
Outcomes and the long-term cost to our districts moving forward.
Thank you for your time.
And consideration.
Thank you. Well, now I'm gonna speak just a little
bit from me. .
I'm feeling like
the whole budget process was hijacked with the talks of
reconfiguration.
And I feel like this is the first time mm-hmm
that we've actually maybe even a little bit.
Talked about the budget. Mm-hmm and I'm a little
disappointed by that.
I would like to see us spend more time.
And talk about the budget.
And try to save some of these positions.
Positions. I have a list of my brain, of other
positions and the higher levels.
Maybe, but I don't wanna share those cuz I don't
wanna put idio puts position, but if you want at
six minutes. Oh thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Good evening, Paul Bartlett, south Portland resident, and grandfather of four.
I'm bringing a little bit of concerns for my daughter.
Who's the mother of those four kids that are in
the school system.
Is this not working. You have to speak. Doesn't like
voice right over. Is it better? You're too tall. You
need to do it. Just get right close to it.
There we go. Alright. I'm time just getting.
Micd up here.
Like I said, Paul Bartlett, I'm bringing a concern that my
daughter couldn't be here tonight. And.
It has to do with the early release. I know
you're not gonna vote on that. I heard you got
the pushback, but it sounds like you still want to
do it.
Because you're gonna ask for a waiver, correct? The, no,
the waiver is not for the early release. The waiver
is for.
A a student day. Thank you to be eliminated. All
right. Thank you. Thank you. Okay.
It's past my bedtime, but I still want to talk.
Sorry.
I, I just think this pushback that you got on
this.
Illustrates some of the headaches that are.
Very excellent staff are going to have, as you go
forward with this reconfiguration.
There's gonna be a lot of grievances ahead. I think
there was a major one. I think this is a
major one. As you tried two, two days into implementation.
Mm-hmm and.
Push back. So I I'll say what I said a
couple weeks ago.
I think you're moving too fast. I think you can
get buy-in. I think more families.
More parents will understand.
The the value of reconfiguration. Once they have some time
to go slow with the implementation.
I know I'm beating a dead horse. It's probably long
dead, but I just, I would just encourage it to.
Reconsider that decision. I think you need a year. That's
all. Thank you. Thank you.
Hi.
My name's Matt Meyer. I'm a south Portland resident.
And I am a member of the art department here
at the high school.
And my daughter attends brown school.
As a parent of a student in the district and
as an art teacher that works with.
South Portland students. I ask that you've reconsidered cutting one
of the high school art departments, teaching positions.
Positions. I understand that hard decisions will have to be
made in this year's budget, but I'd like to remind
the board of the importance of hands-on.
Fine arts classes and the vital role they play.
In so many students' lives.
All of our district students deserve the opportunity to experience
personal growth through the arts.
While I recognize that each and every position in this
district is indeed valuable. I do.
It is essential that we maintain as many student facing
positions as possible.
Each classroom teacher that is cut equates to fewer opportunities
for our students.
Students to meaningful and regularly.
Engage with a trusted adult. And in the case of
this particular position,
fewer opportunities for our students to have a life-changing.
Experience in the arts.
It is important to note that we wanted to the
summer.
Last year with the budget approved for four full-time our
teachers here at the high school.
When one of our art teachers moved mid-summer to take
a job in another state, they were replaced with a
half-time position.
This new teacher, Hannah Schultz has done an incredible job building
meaningful relationships with her students and helping them to find
their artistic voices.
Her students artwork looks great too.
Which I have to say really is a.
The hallmark of an exceptional art teacher.
The fact remains though that many art students who had
signed up for our classes this year were not able
to take them due to the fact that the position
was Bruce reduced to halftime over the summer.
Now we come to an even more dire circumstance where
it seems as though the position.
Will not grow to replace a full-time teacher who left,
but be eliminated altogether.
Thereby
taken our number from four to three.
And I know that the high school.
Has faced, you know, slightly.
Declining enrollment, but it is not.
Gone undergone a 25% shift.
These are hands-on practical classes to teach skills and ways
of looking at the world that enrich students for the
rest of their lives.
For men, 30 seconds left 30. Thanks.
These student for many students, these will be the last
art classes they'll ever take.
It bears mentioning too, that art classes.
Provide a vital emotional outlet for some of the school's
most vulnerable students.
Students a reduction in art department staff will result in
fewer opportunities.
For our students as a parent and as an educator,
I implore you to keep the current position and ensure
that all students have access to art.
Let's keep our priorities straight and that's we owe two
minutes. Okay.
This does matter.
Please reconsider cutting this high school art position. Thank you.
Good evening, Sarah Gay teacher, parent.
Resident president of south Portland teachers association.
First, I, I do want to say I'm one of
those kids who was very literally saved by art.
In school multiple times. Please listen to Matt.
Thank you also for tonight showing more transparency and for
discussing more specifics about this budget than we have heard
up to this point, it is really appreciated and my
phone is blowing up.
Finally in a good way. So I'd like to take
this opportunity. This may seem a little obvious. It may
be a little callous at the moment.
To formally request that we begin next year's budget process
no later than October.
This was our request for this year and we believe
more. So even now that that is a more appropriate
timeframe for our district, especially as we are in the
process of re-envisioning how this process works.
I think we've learned our lesson and I think we
know how to do better.
So I'd like to talk tonight. About time seven years
ago, I made the personal choice to leave a beloved
English teaching position here at south Portland high school.
And began the next phase of my career as a
gifted and talented teacher.
I had absolutely no idea what kind of a change
it would really be. 11th graders and third graders are
really different.
Like really, really different.
I ended up using all of my personal days remaining
that year.
Maybe a septic
to spend time with my GT colleagues.
Who I was going to be working with the next
year, because it was a new world.
And I knew I was not just leaving a type
of job. I was going into a completely different aspect
of education.
And if I didn't have that time, if I didn't
give myself that time, I know I wouldn't have felt
successful starting the year off.
During the first half of that year in a new
role, my 10 years of prior experience didn't really help
me as much as I thought they would.
The hardest parts of the transition. Weren't the teaching. They
weren't the graduate courses.
They weren't the students, it was learning the landscape and
culture of new buildings. It was learning the new colleagues,
their dynamics, my administrators, their expectations.
What it actually meant to be a professional in these
different spaces and contexts.
Contexts. I did choose that path for myself and I
knew that it was going to be really, really hard.
And I knew that it was going to take an
enormous amount of work and energy and time.
And I gave myself as much at that time as
I could.
All of our mentor elementary teachers are about to go
through some amount of that change and none of them
signed up for it.
So Kate's gonna tell you a little bit more about
the merger from Mahoney and Memorial to S SPMS. But
I will say briefly from my perspective that it worked
because 30 seconds, Sarah, thank you. We're ongoing for over
a year. It was still really tough, but we had
the, the time, and by the time we opened our
doors, there was enough unity and confidence that kids walked
in and felt.
Like they were at a school that existed.
We need time for this transition to succeed, and that
time really needs to happen on the clock.
Staff cannot be required to work during the summer or
outside of school hours. And in either case they would
need to be paid for that time.
Please be mindful of the additional costs that will be
incurred by requiring staff to work extra time outside of
school hours.
Especially since we're also that's three minutes.
Jennifer ARD yields some of my time to her. ,
I'll be really fast. We have to pay for moving.
We have to pay for moving stipends. We have to
pay for an interim principle at Calor, even if that's
just an increase, but between an existing teacher, Sal.
Teacher's salary and an admin salary will also have to
pay for a sub for that person. So that is
an increased cost.
This budget changes a lot and we are going to
have to bargain a great deal.
We've already identified several dozen items that need to at
least be discussed in a meet and consult more robustly.
And many that we know will have to be bargained
because they are fundamental changes to people's working conditions.
This is going to take time. It's going to take
collaboration.
And I think it is important to note.
That an obligation to pay people for all of their
work.
Not just the work that happens in one particular context
or in one particular stream. All of our work.
To compensate for that has to be part of our
overall realistic financial budgeting. It just has to be.
So if that responsibility isn't built in now, please do
not blame our contract or our advocacy for members.
If your choice is to make additional staff cuts as
a result.
Lastly, when people ask a question in public comment, they
do. So because they're looking for a public answer.
So I, I think there is a great deal of
obligation on the part of this board to carefully track
those questions and actually respond to them or an identify
those that won't receive an immediate response.
My questions last week were not answered in the meeting
nor have they been answered by email.
Which really is just not okay. And I will return
Jen to the rest of her time. Let her finish.
Let, let Jen finish.
I'll go really quick, Jen, for ARD.
Luard, I don't know many of you weren't here four
or five years ago.
We were short bus drivers in order to get staffed,
we had to create our own training program.
That first year, we were able to train 10 new
drivers the following year, two more the year after that
three more the year after that, maybe one more.
You guys want to change the way our bus drivers
do their job.
You're taking a huge risk because.
This past school year, we finally had one year, we
were fully staffed on our buses.
Buses. We didn't have late pickups for the kids. We
were on time.
We didn't have to do the double runs, triple runs
that were expected during those four and five years ago.
This year coming out. You're risking.
Not being fully staffed with bus drivers. We currently right
now have bus drivers looking for other jobs.
And you need to be fully aware of that. You're
taking a huge risk by asking custo bus drivers to
do custodial work.
Thank you. Thank you, Jen.
Kate. Thank you.
Hi, I'm Kate Porter. I'm a teacher at the middle
school and I am also one of the vice presidents
of the S P T a.
Have kind of a unique perspective.
On the reconfiguration of what's happening. I think I do
anyway.
Years ago when my children were younger, their school, that
the school that they went to proposed.
One year that the first week of school would all
be half days.
I was the first to email.
And call and be in the principal's office that day
to complain as a working parent, cuz that was a
giant inconvenience.
And that was only just because it was hot outside,
due to ish was issues beyond their control.
That school later changed forever. St. Dom's closed a campus
and the students were forced to move to another building.
And then I also am a teacher at the middle
school and I was there for the merger of Mahoney
and Memorial. So I have.
Another perspective when our schools came together, Rebecca stern was
a principal on assignment.
Excuse me, special assignment to be able to consult with
architects, construction issues and other non-teaching type talk topics that
are not in my wheelhouse.
But she was also charged with organizing what needs to
be done in order to create a transition that was
a smooth as possible.
She created a roadmap that can still be followed.
I just lost my
mm for the teachers. It's not as simple as just
one day of getting ready to leave. They have to
pack, they have to organize their things. They have to
PRI prioritize what's worth bringing with them.
What they should get rid of. They have to meet
new teammates. They have to learn about a new building.
Where are the bathrooms? , that's a big deal.
They have to, you have to think about that. There's
cultures blending.
And they have to create a new identity. This is
like a new blended family.
Aligning teaching units, materials, supplies.
Supplies behavior of the children, different buildings might have different
expectations.
Teams need time to talk about this.
How does drop off work? How does pickup work? Who
are who's in the PTL?
PTL, how are, who are they and how can they
help us teachers?
Teachers is countless things to consider. And I know firsthand
that there's district plans that have been developed.
But you can't forget about the people.
All well morning, the loss of their schools.
They're going to be coming together.
This is difficult for the kids, but the adults need
to be acknowledged as well.
The loss of learning time and parenting convenience with half
days is very real.
But so will the anxiety teachers more pretty, if not
enough, time is given to them.
It's not their fault and it's not the kids' fault.
Teachers can do a lot of things.
Which which they do willingly, but this isn't be which
they can't wiggle the nose and make things happen.
Please treat the teachers like the professionals. They are.
And reconsider the amount of time you're giving them to
prepare for this transition. Thank you.
Thank you, Kate.
Connie good evening.
My name is Connie DeSanto.
DeSanto. I am an employee and a parent in the
district.
I am also president of SSPA, which is our support
staff union.
On March 17th, I took a personal day.
And I drove to Augusta and I met up with
two other members of south Portland union leadership.
To speak with lawmakers.
Lawmakers about securing more funding from the state for our
not only our district.
But other main districts as well.
The following week, two members of S P T a
made the same trip up to Augusta to besiege lawmakers
for additional funding.
We also encouraged staff members.
In south Portland to email our representatives.
Representatives, this outreach made an impact.
The latest update that I have just received during this
meeting.
From the state house is that south Portland is likely
going to receive an additional $150,000.
In anticipated additional funding for our, our economically disadvantaged students.
Students and we are set to receive potentially.
An additional 150,000 in addition.
So a total of an additional $300,000.
From state funding based on our homeless.
Student population. So 150 based on our homeless student population
and 150,000 based on our economically disadvantaged students. So that's
300,000 based on what our union leadership has done and
our staff outreach.
So
we are stakeholders have been working very hard, especially our
state representative Deka Deak to get the much needed fund.
To south Portland to help with this budget crisis.
And all three employee unions urge the board to use
these funds to preserve a student facing positions.
Positions. So I wanted to share this information that I
just received.
And I hope that it is.
Received with welcome ears. Thank you. Thank you, Colleen.
I'm Susan Liden Smith. I spoke earlier. I'm a union
representative and I'm a bus driver.
What I was gonna speak on tonight. I've changed a
little bit, cuz of what was said tonight.
But I'm a little, first of all, I want people
to know that we're down two bus drivers. Those positions
will not be filled because of the budget cuts. So
we're already down two.
But I didn't see like saying that five custodians at
40 hours a week. That's 200 hours a week. So
us as bus drivers at work 40 hours a week
yeah. Are gonna do a road rotation.
To pick up that slack.
The interesting pod is they're gonna have us set up
and take down tables and do all the cleanup and
the trash.
Before we go out and do our other runs.
But not only that there's already six injuries, three soldiers.
Soldiers, three shoulder surgeries and three on PT for the
table set up and take down. And these are people.
Where part of their job is.
It's required. 70% of their work is physical labor.
And also the required to move 50 pounds.
And lift and also move heavier than 50 and a
push and pull.
Which is not part of our requirement.
That's why I respectfully asked that you removed this from
the budget.
You allow it to go through negotiations.
Separately because it, I think it's the only fair way
to do it.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Susan.
Hello, my name is Lori Melton. I am a teacher at
the south Portland middle school.
I'd like to start by first thanking.
Ms. Richardson and Ms. Holman.
For even saying the word computer science tonight.
A lot of the emphasis has been on the reconfiguration.
And I just want to say that I'm here, not
only as a coworker, but as a friend.
The related arts at south Portland.
Are really middle school are really taking a hit.
And the unity.
That our school has worked so hard at having right
now is completely.
Up in the air.
I started this out by saying I wanted to clarify.
For you, Ms. Holman.
That know all of our students won't have all of
the related arts options. They will no longer have computer
science as an option.
They will only have one teacher now to teach stem.
We are going into a day and age.
Of of AI and technology.
And, and we are losing.
Two of the most vital positions.
Positions for future students.
Students, not only are students now, but future students.
Students. I'd also like to just say that we are
losing.
Mr Wetzel.
Ms Heller, Mrs. Watson.
And Mr. Hodgkins and Ms. Linson.
Now Mr. Linson.
They do so much more.
Than just teach stem.
P E computer science.
I'm sorry. They do so much more.
Ms Heller basically.
Built our girls' lacrosse team.
She has girls lined up.
To do this at the high school level now.
We lose her. We're not having that, that coaching position.
Why, why.
Why would she do that? Even though she's built it
from the ground up.
Mr Wetzel.
He planted himself in a tiny little sailboat so that
our kids could have adults over at sail main sailing
with him. a after school. He does eSports. He
does steam club.
Ms. Watson, 30 seconds left. She, oh geez. Ms. Watson.
She looks for grants so that the kids that don't
have sneakers, that don't have uniforms that don't have equipment
have equipment. Mr. Hodgkins y'all know what Mr. Hodgkins does.
He's great. Woo-hoo Mr. Hodgkins.
Hodgkins Mr. Lanson does unified PE.
Teaching and special Olympics.
Olympics. I just felt like I needed to be a
voice for our students because telling them that they needed
to go speak to guidance instead of engaging with.
Oh, thank you so much. I'm Laura Stevens. I give everybody
that's three minutes.
I have to say as an educator.
And a parent, it has felt very disingenuous.
Telling any of my students that have questioned why Ms.
Watson, isn't going to be back next year.
Or why miss Hellier or Mr. Wetzel, aren't going to
be back next year.
That my role was to send them to guidance.
To talk to guidance instead of giving them the voice.
To make the signs. Thank you, lady back there that
had that sign.
To make the signs because, and I kind of feel
like maybe that was by design.
If you, if our students knew.
Who these beloved teachers were going to be gone.
There would be a line out the door. They would
be in the parking lot.
These teachers are so much more than just stem computer
science.
PE
and band there's. So.
Much more and we have to look other way other,
other places.
Why are, why are budget is.
Supplies. And I'm the art teacher. Like I want more
supplies but my, my budget is, is increasing for
next year.
I'm willing to reuse markers. I'll tip every single Crayola
marker.
Upside down. If it can like help save a position,
I would also please just like, and I appreciate that
you have asked.
For more clarification about this.
More clarification on what are the actual numbers of just.
Reconfiguring or re-routing
an administrative position to another position.
That's all I have to say. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
Hi, I am bill Newton, a parent of a skill
and kindergartner. First I'd like to say thank you to
all the teachers and union representatives that just spoke for
all of their comments. I thought they were all great.
I also appreciate that member fellows comment tonight that.
Reconfiguration and school closure.
Is the budget. If you take a look at your
budget books, the line items for Kayla are zeroed out.
Nice. I would also like to thank the board members
for their questions tonight. The discussion has felt far more
helpful.
Focused and serious than some of the prior meetings.
Meetings. This is what all of those meetings should have
felt like.
And also at the next opportunity, I would appreciate if
member feller could clarify hers remark. That sounded to me,
like he was saying, he is just starting to realize
that we are in a budget crisis.
You didn't get that.
And I have some questions now, mostly for budget related.
It seems like putting the teacher.
Cost increases indicates the district and board agreed to contracts
that aren't sustainable.
I'd like Abigail to discuss if that.
Is what this challenge is telling us.
And to the unions, please don't look at me sideways
for that question. I really do believe in your value.
And the fight to get the best deal you possibly
can get the district to agree to. It is the
question is only about the responsibility, the board and the
district bear.
We were told what happened to the savings from health
insurance. What I'm wondering is why the district is going
against its own guidance to use any savings from health
insurance to start rebuilding the fund balance, starting with something
is better than nothing.
And then I have a couple questions on the revenue
side.
What is the status of the education foundation?
It seems to have been discussed for a couple of
years, but no progress has been made that I'm awareof.
And I've also seen, it mentioned many times that.
Adding someone even part-time dedicated to grant writing or outreach
efforts.
Efforts would be valuable for the district to generate more
revenue.
Can the administration.
Discuss why it doesn't feel like it is missing out
on any opportunities. And don't see the need for this
type of role.
I think what was just described by.
Someone whose name I didn't write down of. .
Achieving an additional $300,000 from the state, just based on
teachers taking days off and going to talk to them.
Mm-hmm demonstrates the value. Someone dedicated to this could
provide.
And
I would say
shoot forgot a whole thing.
so in June we'll be voting on the only,
only the number of the school budget.
But is the mechanism that, but it is the mechanism
that the people currently have to reject the decisions the
board has made.
There's certainly risk to vote. No, on the school funding
rep minutes, but you have another 30 seconds cause I
didn't stop. Thank you. But it is the public's way
to put pressure on the board to reconsider what they
have done. The board can always rescind their decisions from
Monday and all. Also on Monday member fellow asked if
he had to vote for option a option B.
He was told. Yes. Even though it made sense, sense,
he would pick one of those options since he voted
to close a school.
As an independent person with agency, you don't have to
vote for anything you don't want to vote for. You
can also make motions to delay votes or take other
actions. Thank you.
Hello, my name is Vladimir Corian. I'm a parent at
small.
Last year when we were in gore room.
Gorum I voted the entire city voted on. If the
athletic field should be artificial turf or real turf.
Turf. I feel like this is a much more substantial
and divisive issue that should be put up to a
vote.
Speaking in front of you guys.
Is not something that I want to do. I'm uncomfortable.
I think many people here have things they wanna say.
And they don't have the.
Inclination to do so, or the time, the way you
hear what your constituents feel is to put it up
to a vote.
There's different issues. One is reconfiguration.
Which I have issues with and the budget, which I
also have issues with. There are different issues. Those should
be separate items.
Otherwise the budget vote will be referendum on both and
it'll be very confusing to.
Everyone as to what people feel about.
Each one, the timeline here does not make sense.
It is very disconcerting.
That none of the parents know where their children are
gonna go next year.
When I talk to parents after school, the assumption is
that small, small parents.
Parents of kids at small school will go to brown.
But it's possible. Those kids will be going.
Across town to skill. They don't know.
And I actually don't even know what it achieves to
have kids.
Going from small to brown. If the demographics are more
similar.
And, and similar with skilling and.
The other school. Sorry. I forgot it.
It's okay. So
in short, please.
Find a way to put this up to a vote.
Otherwise, I will be voting down this budget and I'll
be encouraging others to do so, too.
And I understand that there's consequences to that, but if
there's a poison pill in it, that is your own
doing. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name is
Victoria Libby. I'm a south Portland resident with one child
currently in elementary school and in another, who will be
in entering soon.
I wanna begin by acknowledging how proud I am of
this community. Families have shown up, asked incredibly thoughtful and
difficult questions and engaged in good faith.
Despite only being brought into this process in the past
few weeks. And despite many of these questions still remaining
unanswered.
I understand that cuts need to be made and that
difficult financial decisions are unavoidable.
But I am genuinely baffled that a deficit that's been
built over many years is now being addressed through sweeping
changes that families are expected to absorb in a matter
of months.
There is not been a clear explanation of why it
was not addressed gradually.
Or Wyatt is forced to now be so immediate.
That imbalance matters.
As a clinical psychologist, I can say clearly.
Young children do not benefit.
From rapid, large scale disruption to their environments and relationships.
Stability and predictability and a sense of belonging are foundational
to their emotional wellbeing.
And their ability to learn.
This proposal risks, undermining.
All three of those things at the same time.
We have not been given a clear explanation of how
this deficit developed over time.
Or why it was not addressed gradually.
We have not been shown evidence from other communities that
this kind of reconfiguration.
Improves academic outcomes.
Outcomes. We have not been given clear data on what
increased busing will look like financially.
Logistically or in terms of traffic and environmental impact.
We are being asked to accept major.
Trade-offs splitting siblings.
Siblings increasing busing, fracturing schools, communities.
When we are just beginning our recovery from the social
isolation of the pandemic.
All of this without clear evidence of how this will
work or how we will measure its success.
I'm asking you not to approve this plan as presented.
A minimum, please pause the implementation.
Until a full transportation and cost analysis is provided clear
academic and developmental data from comparable dis districts is shared.
And the community is meaningfully engaged in shaping a path
forward.
Please convince me.
Convince us. We love this community.
We wanna stay dedicated to it. I need to know
you are working in the best interest of my children.
Of our children and our community.
So please help us get on board with you.
Thank you.
I I'm just gonna really respectfully request that people not
clap.
There's a reason for it. And it, it is in
our policy.
And it does exist at the city council level as
well.
And part of the reason is that clapping can feel
intimidating to other people.
Who might have a view on the other side?
So I, I'm just, I'm not trying to be a
jerk about this. I'm I'm really not. I'm just trying
to.
Implement the policy that we have and just.
Ask that you please
please refrain from clapping.
If we allow clapping, we have to allow booing.
And no nobody wants that.
So again, if you just.
Just please just just know I'm not trying to be
a jerk. I'm just really trying to enforce the policy.
Thank you.
My name is Alison glider. I'm a parent of a
future south Portland student, and a third generation alumni of
south Portland high, which I have been proud of.
First, I will share that there is wasted energy.
On your campuses. I can personally attest to 24 hour
year long lights lining a pedestrian path behind the new
middle school.
It was not communicated with the neighborhood.
Initially it is not necessary. And it certainly is not
wanted by the neighboring homes where they now live with
light pollution year round 24 hours a day.
You could start looking there. I implore you to reconsider
your choice on reconfiguring our remaining elementary schools to be
either K one or 24. This decision was made too
quickly and claiming to welcome stakeholder feedback. Only now.
Is a slap in the face to every family and
teacher affected.
Consider that only a few years ago, a family with
a first, third and fifth grader would have seen them
all attend one school together.
May have walked there. Now you are asking that such
a family attend three schools across town.
Three transportation schedules for that family.
Countless school emails and newsletters.
Newsletters loss of a sense of continuity.
I have not heard adequate defense of any benefits.
Benefits you may claim decreasing enrollment now, but why are
you not discussing the pending housing developments across our city?
There are no signs of a decreasing appetite in building
more.
Finally as a middle school English teacher in a neighboring
district.
Myself. I believe I have firsthand experienced that many.
That that may better help you understand the need to
better.
Right size leadership and how retaining leadership as we heard
is needed.
Starts with teacher leaders.
Teacher leaders are the ones who are practically planning and
implementing curriculum.
Who are amongst themselves.
Sharing strategies, learning.
Brainstorming taking courses.
Indeed department leaders, as I have the experience to attest
to are often the ones doing the researching of new
curriculum programs.
Programs in a budget crisis.
In which negligence has been.
Extreme, perhaps the only truly essential expenditure is for those
teachers who work directly daily.
All day with students.
Students, not with folks who send occasional newsletters that will
be deleted by staff.
Not two folks who lead a yearly workshop on a
professional development day, but on teachers.
Teachers you are already delivering a devastating blow by closing
a beloved school, please, please go back to the drawing
board on your choice of cuts. Thank you so much.
Please.
Thank you.
Caroline Bowman, south Portland, parent, and homeowner.
Good evening board members. I'm speaking to you tonight as
a parent of two children, both currently attending south Portland
middle school.
As a parent, I recognize the unprecedented.
Social and developmental pressures facing our adolescents and teenagers.
Teenagers. It is striking that none of the current board
members have children currently at the middle or high school
level.
This means you lack direct experience with the current context
of adolescent struggles, which are drastically different than they were
decades ago.
This board's proposal is shocking and frightening cutting these vital
programs, including.
Cuts to computer science, stem.
Arts robotics, percussion ed tech and physical education.
Profoundly impacts student life and makes no sense.
We are eliminating.
21st century technology and wellness programs.
Programs when our student population needs these more than ever.
These critical educators help students think about possible careers and
open up future doors.
While core curriculum classes are necessary.
Related arts classes offer a much needed reprieve from the
day and are often the most interesting and engaging classes
for our students.
Students. And I don't know the name of the art
teacher at the middle school that spoke, but I agree
with absolutely everything that she said as well.
And I asked the board, why are we cutting these
student facing positions?
Positions without making necessary and painful cuts to higher tier
administrators.
It is past time we stopped looking at what is
ideal.
And make cuts to non-student facing positions to save these
important educators.
Educators. I urge you to listen to everybody here tonight.
You have already made the drastic decision to close an
elementary school and restructure the entire elementary program.
With just two months left in the current school year.
This is too many changes at once.
We are currently se seeking our third superintendent in five
years.
To make these changes and staffing cuts now.
Without infrastructure or clear plan.
Is fiscally and socially irresponsible.
These massive changes to the school climate.
And staff demands will cause us to lose even more
educators.
Educators. I urge you to reconsider making these cuts.
Cuts. And since my time hasn't been cut off yet,
I think I spoke faster than 30 seconds. I.
Also want to say that I strongly disagree with the
decision to restructure the elementary schools, given this short timeline.
I feel lucky that my children are past the elementary
school stage. But thinking back to that time as a
parent, it is.
Very difficult to consider.
Those changes on the emotional level for students, for educators.
Educators. And for parents who are already stretched thin with
work demands and lack of.
Family and community in the area. So three minutes. Thank
you. Yeah.
Good evening.
My name is Wheeler Boyd BOFU. I live in south
Portland. Woo. This thing moves I'm. I'm sorry, could you
just say your name again? Wheeler Boyd BofA.
It's a tough one. Okay. I'm grateful to the board
and the district staff for the considerable work that has
gone into navigating an extraordinarily difficult budget situation.
Given Tuesday's passages of the school closure and reconfiguration measures.
I have some questions and concerns about what comes next.
My ultimate concern is for the students, our teachers and
staff in our communities.
Tonight, I'm gonna talk about what I've witnessed in the
budget process that I believe threatens all three.
The budget process to date has not instilled confidence in
the phases to come.
This already, this has already been discussed at length, but
I still think it's worth reviewing how we got here.
School closures and or reconfigurations are among the most consequential
decisions a district can make. They typically involve dedicated planning
teams, input solicited from teachers sustained community engagement and rigorous
independent analysis, not secondary efforts, upended to an annual budget
cycle.
In the budget meetings to date, I've heard lots of
moving anecdotes and genuine concerns, and I've heard people speak
to core district goals, equity and academic outcomes in particular.
But the importance of those goals has hardly been reflected
in the planning process and supporting analysis that got us
here.
And while the budget constraint requires immediate action. Reconfiguration is
not a budget solution. The urgency behind this item is
entirely self-imposed.
The analysis of academic outcomes in E inequity supporting the
closure and reconfiguration were alarmingly thin.
I've heard the district and board poke holes and data
presented by school staff. But the district analysis has similarly
flawed and should be setting the bar.
The scoring matrix used to evaluate the various closure and
reconfiguration scenarios is minimally aligned with the district's own state
admission.
Mission. Even when accounting for the filters applied for this
fiscal year.
I wouldn't be so critical if this were the beginning
of the process, but this was the basis for Tuesday's
votes. So here we are.
Based on all that. When I look forward.
I'm concerned with our ability to deliver on reconfiguration and
passable form before the next school year, the reconfiguration measure
that passed wasn't tied to a concrete plan.
The bulk of that work remains the response tonight indicating
the role, the school board in the reconfiguration process is
to be determined is only the latest indication of how
behind the ball we are.
Our staff are already absorbing the loss of roughly one
in 10 colleagues. They have schools to run in classes
to teach.
Adding reconfiguration planning and implementation and a school closure compounds
an already severe burden.
So my questions for this board are.
How are we monitoring the progress? 30 seconds rates and
planning and implementation.
And, and how do we know if we find ourselves
off track?
And what does the reconfiguration off-ramp look like and how,
and when do we decide if we need to take
it? Thank you.
Hi, my name is Aiden Rehan. I'm a parent of
a south Portland kindergartner at brown school and incoming kindergartner
in FY 28. So, first of all, I just wanna
say thank you to all the teachers that are spoken.
I think it's incredibly moving to hear from that. And
I think it's.
It's clear. There's an incredible amount of grieving that is
going on in our community over the budget and the
losses.
And I think it was so moving to hear the
middle school teacher talk about how the students aren't having
processed this. So the, the parent and the student grieving
is still yet to come.
And I'm here to point out that in a time
of an incredible amount of change.
We are choosing to undergo reconfiguration where we change the
delivery.
For half of the students in our district.
We are not giving people time to process these change.
Now I want to thank board member feller for pointing
out, asking a question about change management, cuz I think
it's timely.
And it was timely before the vote.
This is the first time we have had a question
about change management.
Before, after we have voted to undergo the change.
Now a key part of change management is leadership. So
here's my first question.
When are we hiring a new superintendent?
What is the role of that superintendent in leading this
process?
What is the role of the superintendent in setting the
priorities of this process? Are we going to do this
and then give that superintendent?
The end result. Second, a key part of change management
is alignment.
And I have a genuine question. Is there alignment among
the board members for why we are undertaking this?
Because I'm gonna tell you what I am hearing as
a parent. Who's been watching this process play out.
So the district staff said, the reason we're doing this
is educational outcomes and the gap between schools, but then
in the vote, what was said is that educational outcomes
don't matter for redistricting.
Educational outcomes don't matter for redistricting, even though that is
the reason the staff wants to undertake it.
Some of you have told me, this is a budget
reason we need to right size and get back on
track. So here's my sucking question.
How much of the projected savings from reconfiguration is based
on actual quotes for things like transportation.
For things like bus routes, here's some facts.
Kindergartners and pre-Ks need special classrooms. They need special classrooms
with special sinks with special bathrooms. Can they be in
portable classrooms?
Classrooms, do we have capital budget available to rebuild classrooms
to increase the number of classes that we are having
in these reconfigured schools?
Or are we walking headlong into another process?
Where we don't have a clear budget and we are
signing ourselves up for deficit.
Spending to spend a balance that we don't have. Finally,
we keep getting told that this is about equity and
I am all for equity. I spent a huge part
of my career in equity.
How are you defining equity in this process? And how
is that going to lead to trade-offs? Is it racial
equity? Is it economic equity?
Is it geographic equity? Is it equity and resource access?
How can we be successful at something we have not
defined? And how can we set up KPIs for that
success when we're not even aligned with what we are
doing? That's three minutes, you have created a trust gap
in this community, and I urge you to delay to
rebuild the, that trust. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good evening members of the south Pearl community. My name
is Lucy Hutzel and I'm a student at south Portland
high school.
I'm speaking today on behalf of the computer science teacher
at the middle school. My dad, Mr. Wetzel.
I do not know all the logistics of this budget
cut, but I do know that it is impacting my
school experience and my family included.
Included when my dad first joined the district, he did
not yet have his teaching certificate.
Still the south Portland staff placed their trust in him.
And that was greatly appreciated.
At the time he was working as a substitute across
both Mahoney, middle school and Memorial middle school.
And at the high school, figuring out the next step
in his career and not surprisingly was opened with welcome
arms.
When a position opened for the computer science teacher, my
dad did everything that he could took a prepare for
this position.
He committed himself to creating a classroom that was engaging
educational and focused on important skill building.
Similar to every teacher and staff in the district.
Every day, he would come home from school with new
robots and tools for his students to explore.
He even started an afterschool gaming club.
When he prepared for, with a lot of dedication.
And a lot of Mario kart in order to give
students a place to express this love for eSports.
eSports my dad, along with all students with all teachers
at risk of being cut has invested endless time, money,
and effort to make sure students are not only learning,
but enjoying school.
They care deeply about giving us the best education possible.
Eliminating computer science as a whole would be a step
in the wrong direction.
Especially in a world war technology is rapidly advancing.
Learning how to code and how to safely navigate the
internet is a modern day superpower.
One that students need access to in early education to
set them up for success in the future.
Furthermore eliminating other students' personal interests and passions can be
mentally impactful to them and ultimately unfair to related arts
generally.
When younger students come up to me and ask if
Mr. Wetzel is my dad, I don't hesitate and am
never embarrassed in telling them.
I'm proud. I completely agree with my former teacher, Ms.
Milton.
Students would be lining up to speak just as I
am right now. If they're aware of the situation of
this budget, cut.
Right now, south Portland risks losing more than just teachers.
Teachers, they arrest losing mentors, coaches.
Club advisors and role models. People who make a lasting
difference in students' lives.
Especially for those who may not have that support elsewhere.
I encourage my peers to reach out to our representative.
As that is what I've urged my personal community todo.
I Tru hope that my community can make the right
decisions financially to improve the situation, though. It can be
difficult. I know that there are solutions available.
Thank you. Thank you.
I am Mr. Wetzel.
And initially I was here to potentially yield.
Time.
And going
after that.
Is obviously very emotional.
But I just want to thank.
My fellow educators.
Educators this community.
My students and my daughter.
For their bravery and their support.
My heart goes out to every.
Single teacher who at this moment.
Is unsure.
What their future holds.
Holtz. This is
a major challenge.
Tomorrow.
I will return to the hallways.
Hallways and I will face these.
Students and still not know what to say.
Unless something happens.
I don't know what that something is going to be.
And if it happens tonight, it might give some reprieve.
Whatever happens.
Computer science is available. This.
Year and will not be available.
Next year under this proposal.
As a related arts class available now.
And not available.
Next year under this proposal, I just want to make
certain.
That that language is clear.
I thank you all so much.
For the incredible amount of effort you have put into
this and the incredible amount of thought.
I know that everyone
working on this budget has done that.
And I wish it was different.
Thank you. Thank you.
My name's Brian Green. I'm a father of four living in
south Portland.
I want to thank the district and board for having
us here tonight. And I want to especially thank the
teachers and staff of the district for continuing to take
care of our kids.
In these incredibly uncertain days.
I wanna start with a few words about Kaler school.
My two daughters ages four and six of each attended.
pre-K at Caler over the last two years.
Kayla was our family's first exposure to real school. And
from day one, we were welcomed into the community.
My kids received exceptional instruction and care from the dedicated
and talented teachers and staff at Kaler, they learned skills,
made friends built relationships.
My older daughter was even selected as a member of
the illustrious Kayla Cougar Cub club. To this day, one
of her proudest achievements.
We have loved our experience at Caler and I'm heartbroken
for our whole community.
Over the vote to close this school. So suddenly.
What a failure for this district and board.
To preside over the closure of this thriving and vibrant
school.
On the rush and chaotic reconfiguration plan. I have a
question, not for the board, but for the community.
How will we respond to the idea that these board
members.
The majority of whom ran for their seats, unopposed were
able to so quickly disfigure our school district.
Who among us will challenge the five board members who
voted for reconfiguration when their next up for election.
Claire Holman's term ends ends in 2026.
Adrian Dowling's term ends in 2027.
Rosemary Dean's term blessedly mercifully ends in 2027.
George Rich's term ends in 2028.
Tyler Smith's term ends in 2028.
As the painful memories of the present budget chaos.
Fade in the coming months and years, I implore each
of us to remember these names.
Let's make it so that these are the last years
that any of these individuals hold any sort of power
in south Portland in the state of Maine or anywhere
else.
These five individuals have voted for reconfiguration with no plan
in place.
They have advanced a short-sighted old-fashioned one-sided view of equity,
pushing aside concerns from parents, teachers, and community members.
Particularly the views of those who care for kids with
special needs for whom continuity means everything.
They have quite literally endangered our kids by having no
plan for transportation and safety around these changes, they have
seized the chance.
They have seized the chance to change the nature of
elementary education in south Portland.
While the district is being presided over.
By an interim superintendent whose biggest responsibility appears to be
running the timer during public comment they have made
an arbitrary and capricious decision in a matter.
That say, remember Smith will not affect them on a
personal level.
They claim to be part of a representative government, but
they have failed to represent the views of their community.
The district and board of consistently shown no understanding of
what we're, what matters to working parents.
Has the district or board considered that reconfiguration that with
reconfiguration, we now plan to expand the student populations.
At Fort elementary schools, 30 seconds, which currently have full
aftercare programs.
Programs. I know many parents who've been turned away from
aftercare. The only school with aftercare openings is the one
being closed. If we now need to expand those programs,
how will we pay for them? And if we don't
expand them, how will working parents make their lives work?
Has anyone considered this, the situation where we're injured, introducing
where we're working? Parents will now have kids at mold,
multiple schools that may not have access to aftercare.
Laura McCloud you one more time.
It also appears that in order to bus kids all
over the district, we will need at least 10 more
bus drivers, a fourth bus tier and expanded roots. This
will cost money on the order of hundreds of thousands
of dollars.
When combined with potential extra costs to expand aftercare.
There goes the savings from closing a school and reconfiguring.
How can we trust that the district will get the
answers right on their first try for any of the
major decisions that lie ahead.
Their track record record over the last few months speaks
for itself. They first said reconfiguring, all five elementary schools
would save millions of dollars. It wouldn't. Then they recommended
closing skill in wrong answer. Then they recommended closing Dyer.
Then Klor wrong again? You have an no room for
error in. You don't have enough time.
Our kids deserve better than this better planning, better leadership
and a board that actually listens. I hope that what's
happened here serves as a wake up call to every
south Portland resident who cares about the future of our
community. Our kids are not an experiment.
And this community is not powerless. We will remember, and
we will act.
Hard to top that one, her name is Jonathan drown.
Me and my wife have a daughter who attends small.
And another daughter who's going to be entering the school
system in next year.
And four months.
Four months for a district of 3000 students.
Students, half of those who were in the elementary school
system were gonna be.
Victims of this reconfiguration.
As somebody else said
kids thrive on consistency.
And predictable routines.
Routines, especially students like my daughter.
Who have additional needs and you know, that additional consistency.
It's a make or break.
For a lot of kids out there, typical and neurotypical.
So what I want to ask and get some concrete
answers on is what the plan is with the reconfiguration.
On keeping the special ed teams together.
And keeping that consistency for the kids who need it.
And even the kids who don't.
Don't have the extra needs. They still need that extra
consistency.
And spreading four grades across.
Four five schools, four schools.
I don't understand how that.
I don't understand how that makes sense.
So
I have serious concerns about.
An entire reconfiguration being done at four months.
Yeah, I
I could parrot all of the other comments that have
been made here. I won't, I just want to.
Finish my time by thanking all of the teachers who've
spoken and the union members. And.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Jonathan.
Hi, Rachel GIBS. I'm a south Portland resident in speech
language pathologist at Dyer elementary school.
I wasn't planning on talking. I actually drove over.
To talk. So I'm back.
I want to speak about my concerns for special education
again in south Portland.
In the upcoming years and specific concerns about cutting the
position of the OT at Dyer elementary school.
Thank you. Oh, also thank you to the board. I
actually think you guys are doing really wonderful work and
you've put in so many hours. So I really appreciate
it. Special. Thank you to board member Richardson for asking
some really important questions about this state and future state
of special ed education in our school.
To follow up and answer the last speaker's question about
the plans to keep special education teams together.
One of the current plans is to remove embedded OTs
from.
Highly specialized programs within our elementary schools.
Thank you to whomever answered some of my questions that
I posted to the slide deck. I asked the question,
what is the current total annual cost for out of
district?
Special education placements. And I received the reply.
That the costs are unpredictable. New cases can arise at
any point in the year.
About 755,000 is budgeted for tuition to private sources.
755,000.
That is a lot of money. And I have a
follow up question. This is not my area of expertise,
but I've had students who I've asked about potentially needing
out of district placement in those special purpose programs. I
was told, no, not yet. They were any, even if
they were to be placed on a list, that list
would be years long.
If that is true and the lists are years long,
shouldn't we be able to budget for that.
How many. So I have another question. How many special
education students are currently placed in special purpose programs?
Programs outside of the district.
This is clearly a very expensive service and I want
to keep our students in public schools. How can we
do that when we're removing the critical support of our
embedded OTs? If we intend to keep students with signif
significant needs in our schools, we need to staff the
pro programs appropriately.
And as to staffing the FLS classrooms, firstly, this is
a numbers problem. As I said on Monday, the district
has struggled for years to fill special education ed tech
positions. At the beginning of the year, this year at
Dyer in one of our F L S classrooms, there
were six new hire special education ed techs. We only
had.
One return from the year prior.
And they had a new, special education.
Teacher, the district hired someone at the beginning of the
year. She left because the district did not provide her
with a mentor.
The positions for special education at techs were still posted.
Finally in Jared, February three seconds for each, the district
found someone to hire. Unfortunately, that person left after four
days.
Which leads me to point out that beyond numbers, it's
an experience problem.
It's a really, really hard job. And when, even when
these ed techs are hired, unfortunately, sometimes they lack the
training.
Experience or ongoing support necessary to meet the complexity of
our student needs.
Our OT meets those needs and makes us a really
strong team.
I have more to say that's 30 that's three minutes.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Rachel.
I'm Stacy Lauren special education teacher at skill and school.
I too was not planning to speak. I was in
the middle of dinner.
And yes, I gave a lunch to make sure education
happened in my classroom. So now I'm on lunched and
undented for this cuz it came up about the EdTech
positions and the OT positions.
Positions. I have an OT in my functional life skills
room. That is cut.
If we cut those two, her job covered two ed
tech positions.
Positions. So we're saying now that we're gonna need four
ed techs next year, because you're cutting two OTs that
cover.
For ed tech positions. I had an ed tech leave
in December, cuz my room was too hard and too
dangerous for her. She was a retired teacher and was
scared.
So we are not training them. I have a sub
in my room. He would be an EdTech one. I
love my staff, but he would be an EdTech one,
but we cover him as a sub so that he
gets to stay.
And that closed that position. That is not an EdTech.
He is great, but we need experienced people.
In my room.
I am. I ended my day in a restraint because
the child was unsafe for herself.
For myself and for the students around her.
We it's safety in this room and the OT.
OT is great, except for she had to cover a
kid. We don't do one-on-ones. We say we don't give
one-on-one ed sex. So she has helped a behavior student.
In my room that had medical and behavior needs. So
while she was governing them, no services for OT, he's
back in my program. Another child's having behavior. She's giving
her services to my other EdTech is one-on-one I'm down
staff every day.
So then they call out when they are tired, they
are sick. They're getting injured.
On the job. So when we cut this OT, they're
more than just an OT. They're my backup. They're helping
me know how to do ADLs. This self-care. What is
part of an FLS program?
I am helping them learn other skills, but we are
pulled, we are under.
Staffed in these rooms. So when we just pulled these
two positions, we're, we're opening for more.
Just, I, I don't know where we get. There's only
six.
Open because we're putting subs in those positions. Those subs
are great. I'm not saying no one is not great,
but they're.
They're not trained.
And that's not fair to the students. I, you know,
for their education, it's not fair to the people and,
and the safety just all the way around.
This is just not a safe decision to cut those
OTs and understand.
Where Edtechs are. So please question more about the Edtechs.
Techs and the safety of these classrooms and the education
of these tech 30 seconds more.
And I'll give my time.
Thank you.
Hi, my name's Alex Strube. I'm a mother.
And a parent of a small school, second grader, and
an incoming kindergartner.
First of all. I just wanna say I am so.
It's like mind blowing and actually like deeply emotional hearing
from our teaching staff. I can tell you that there
are other teachers I've spoken with, who are terrified to
be here today.
They're scared to share their voices because there's been cuts
made and we don't know what else is coming. There
have been so many surprises that people are afraid to
speak up.
And I'm so proud of those who have, and just
so incredibly humbling.
But this is what you've instilled.
Three years is what I was told. It took Lewiston
to reconfigure their school.
One year is what Portland.
Took to actually consider reconfiguration.
Three and a half months.
Is what we've done.
It's about a 10th of the time that Lewiston took.
I know you're tired.
Like you guys have been here relentlessly. Right. And you've
been responding to, some of you have been responding to
emails.
Emails, but I guess like, you know, when you fly
in an airplane, you sit in an exit row, they
ask you like, are you willing and able to assist.
And if you're not, then raise your hand and go
sit somewhere else.
And so I'm asking you.
Like don't hold this timeline because that's the timeline we
wrote on a piece of paper or it's on a
board.
I'm asking you to do the right thing.
Do the right process, be willing and able to assist.
Sit in that seat, please.
I feel like
reconfiguration was hid within a budget.
I can tell you there's so many parents I've spoken
to who had no idea what was at stake? Myself
included.
Included. I feel very blindsided by it. And what it
did was it made it such that people couldn't share
their voices about that topic.
And the people came in, share their voices on that
topic, and then it completely diluted the budget conversation.
So neither group was heard.
I feel
and another parent and another staff member had said, you
know, now saying we're, we're putting out surveys and now
we're asking people for their.
Their opinion, teachers, children.
Parents it's just too late.
And so I'm asking you just again, be willing and
able to assist. There is precedent across our country.
Where school boards have made decisions and they have reversed
them. They have given it more time, they have taken
a seat back and said, okay, let's rethink this 30
seconds left.
And I'm urging you to do the best thing for
our community. If you've truly heard us to be better
and to sit back and say, okay, maybe we do
need to rethink this and slow ourselves down.
So to speed, read my questions.
Questions. When will we get details about how we arrived
at this budget position? When will our existing teachers get
information about their roles and the safety of their positions?
Positions. When is your go no-go date on any of
these?
And what can the board do to put more details
into a public vote, like reconfiguration and budget against things
like OT and our arts programs.
Programs. Sorry, can you can you do that again?
You, I think you, can she read slowly? Can I
read slowly?
Rose Evelyn parent. Hi Steve. My time. Thanks. I'll read
my questions more slowly from the top.
When will we get details on how we arrived at
this budget position? When will our existing teachers get information
about their roles and the safety of their positions?
Positions. When is your go no-go date on.
Any of these decisions and that's not, I don't mean
like when things are approved. I mean, if we are
in the middle of reconfiguration,
and it's clear. There's no details.
Details. What's the rip cord look like.
And also what can the board do to put more
details towards a public vote?
Things like reconfiguration and allocating budget against OT and arts,
because plus one, I had to pick AstroTurf or real
grass, and I'd like to do that for these things.
Hi, Jennifer Christensen. I'm a parent.
In the district and a homeowner, I spoke the other
night and missed my last thought. So I'm just gonna
read my last thought. I just wanted to acknowledge all
of our teachers in our district tonight. Actually, I have
heard a lot more talk about the teachers, Nick, knowing
the hardships. I hadn't really heard that the last couple
days.
But, but by you guys and by people talking so.
Last on Monday, I wanted to acknowledge the teachers.
Teachers, who I think are among the best in our
state. And I also want everybody in this room to
remember that for the first 60 days of this school
year.
They worked with no contract. They came to school. They
came to their jobs every single day with a smile
on their face and took care of our kids.
Despite not having a contract.
Five months later they're. Now they've now been surprised by
a second year in a row of mass layoffs and
a school closure.
They're going to end the year by saying goodbye to
the beloved colleagues, students, possibly their jobs.
And maybe moving to a new school next year.
I'm not a teacher. I would never be a teacher.
Thank goodness for our teachers, but I imagine that this
year must rank among the toughest they've ever had in
their career.
Even during years in which the budget cycles aren't devastating.
It feels like they're always being asked to do more
and more and more.
For the same amount of money and time in the
school day.
At this point, some must be questioning their job security.
Worrying about their increased job responsibilities that come with all
these layoffs and moves.
Moves the students they teach, of course, and their overall
career loyalty to a district that doesn't really seem to
have their backs anymore.
I'm personally very concerned about teacher attrition in our district.
And about south Portland, school's overall reputation as a stellar
district. For any perspective, new hires in the future.
I just hope that the school board and the administration
are working together on a comprehensive plan.
To rebuild some semblance of trust between the teachers in
this district, because I think it's going to take years
to regain.
Thanks.
Thank you, Jennifer.
Hi, I'm Kate LA Turo. I'm a parent of a
first grader and a preschooler.
And that was a long line to remember that I
haven't done public speaking since my sixth grade spelling B.
Thank you to our teachers.
Teachers, my volunteer stint and conferences tonight reminded me that
I'm just incredibly grateful and can't believe my kids get
this kind of care.
I attended the meeting on Monday night at which the
board passed that hasty controversial.
Budget neutral and plan less reconfiguration.
But left the district without a budget.
It was a weird budget meeting.
The next morning, my first grader asked, are they gonna
change the schools? And I told her, yes. And she
crumbled and said, I just started there. I have to
change schools. And I said, I know, I'm sorry. She
said, mama, what school I go to? Wil my friends
be the there.
And will the teachers I know be there. And that's
when I started to sound a lot like admin did
at that meeting. I said, I don't know. I, I
don't know.
I I'm sorry. I don't know.
And I certainly look forward to these answers about reconfiguration.
As I imagine, do the board members who approved it.
They certainly must be curious to learn what they voted
for.
I I, that was, that was very hard to watch.
So these are the burning questions from the kids up
to the parents. Where will our school kids be going
to school?
And most importantly, how will that be determined?
We were told that the point of reconfiguration is to
create.
Equity. And I'd like to have a word on that,
please.
Something that's been hard for a lot of parents. Is
that those who didn't get on board with the plan
list reconfiguration were implied to be insufficiently devoted to equity.
Or diversity and that's, that's false and it's insulting.
Nobody lives in south Portland because they're trying to avoid
diversity.
Basically the entire rest of the state where you can
do that.
we live here because of the community, the natural
resources and the diversity.
The kids in this town get eight years in a
full city school. I think that's amazing. My husband and
I chose this on purpose. We see it as a
benefit. We know our kids will be better for it.
So to imply that any question of a plan list
reconfiguration is due to narrow-mindedness was, was very difficult. For
many of us. We need information.
And that's pretty much it.
So in January in this town, parents are making spreadsheets
about how they're gonna get through this summer in terms
of childcare and camps. And if you don't know that,
then you're not entirely in touch with family life right
now.
And piecemeal childcare to cover a proposed new updates. We'll
run a working family $20 an hour. And if you
don't know that, that means you're not totally in touch
with what's going on right now.
So I feel that reconfiguration is a wild distraction from
a very real budget crisis.
And then to make that decision and now ask for
our collaboration feels absolutely backwards. Why are we cramming this
through when the budget crisis should have been the focus.
Please consider ways to change chorus. It's not too late.
Hello and good evening. Hi everyone.
I'm discombobulated.
Discombobulated. I'm a single mom. My daughter is somewhere hiding.
And refused to leave early, cuz she really wanted me
to be brave and speak. I don't have a prepared
speech, but I will say this.
I moved to Portland, south Portland to be close to
my best friend who lives down the street so that
we could build community and walk our kids.
That I could get to know the neighbors for most.
Mostly here, get to know our teachers.
Teachers. I didn't come no offense to our education system
in the United States, but I didn't come specifically for academics.
I came for community. I came for flexibility. I came
for adaptability diversity so that my kid.
Had the foundation of being a kind human being.
Knowing her community and how responsible she is to everyone
around her.
And then comes the learning, the academics, the knowledge, which
she'll have access to probably, you know, with some robot
next to her in just a few years from now.
So.
Community was the number one reason why I came here.
I bought the most expensive house on the lot. Not
for the reason of this expensive. I busted my ass
to do it.
But because I have elderly parents, I'm also a psychologist.
I'm an entrepreneur and a business owner.
I'm a homeowner here and I have my daughter in
small school.
And I came specifically so that I could have three
to four years of building community walking our kids to
school, et cetera.
My daughter's also black and Iranian.
I am Iranian and I'm an immigrant. I understand what
it's like to be in a school.
And not understand the language. I know what it was
like to wear a scarf and be in a classroom
setting in Irvine.
Where no one knew where Iran was on the map.
Unlike today.
I know what it's like to be in an ESL
class. And I know what it's like to have ADHD
dyslexia.
And the lakes I'm still.
Extremely proud of my heritage and who I am.
And I firmly believe
kids need integration and diverse, sorry. Kids need diversity.
The research, however,
on developmentally on kids until the.
Grade of third, third grade is not the research article
you guys have put on the board and it's not,
you guys I'm addressing you, but really it's Dr. Prince
and everyone else that's behind the scenes that has been.
Compiling this data. So
one of the moms, or I think one of the
special ed teachers just shared how important it is for
consistency and psychosocial.
Development and community building.
And peer learning during those fundamental years.
If my kid is on a bus.
To the other side of town, I will no longer
be living here or I'll be homeschooling her.
I paid the majority of taxes on my street and
my little town actually last year.
If I give you the number someone's gonna explode, or
my head will explode, just remembering how hard I work
to do that seconds. Thank you.
And by the way, thank you for giving me your
time, whoever that was.
And 80% I believe of your budget is home taxes
and 60% of the budget, the money that I paid
went to the school district.
So please understand that me as a brand new person
in this community who comes and listens to what is
being voted on.
I am busy, busting my ass from morning till night.
My daughter, I couldn't find a babysitter for, and there
was no childcare. So she's here. She's gonna go to
bed at some 11. O'clock probably, and we're gonna have
a meltdown in the morning. The reason why I wasn't
here earlier is because I didn't know.
That you guys were reconfiguring or voting to reconfigure a
school. Thank God for some of the parents who helped.
Get me here. I don't have any animosity towards anyone.
I don't know anyone.
But to say race and integration and diversity.
Is the reason for passing a budget that frankly, if
I bought my house and, or a car.
And ran my budget. The way that the school has
ran their budget.
They would be repossessed.
My car and my home would be repossessed. Your time
is stopped. So.
Do not make our kids, please.
Do not allow yourselves.
To please vote on something that makes the kids and
the teachers.
Teachers forget about the OTs that you're firing. I mean,
it's unbelievable. This is unbelievable. And people come up here
and calmly communicate. I understand, sir. I understand. Thank you.
People come here and calmly communicate and somebody needs to
have the emotion in the room.
And express it loudly. What you are doing is you
are having.
Some kind of massive budget problems that you've had.
Covered under all of this other shenanigans.
Shenanigans and who pays the cost? It's my kid who
has to get up an hour earlier and I barely
make it to Lori.
She's the high school principal who holds her hand and
takes her in cuz she has anxiety in the morning.
Thank you. Sorry, I didn't finish everything properly. I hope
you have a good night. Thank you everyone.
Thank you.
Heather I'm Abby Anderson, one of the S P T
a vice presidents.
Presidents. So we as the S P T a advocate
for our members.
All our members, we advocate for unmet needs and programming,
and much of our work is ensuring that appropriate processes
are followed.
Last year and potentially again, this year.
The school board has inadvertently set a precedent to put
positions back into the budget because of the personal dispositions
of board members.
This budget is about positions, not people. So the same
principle should be used. If the decision is made to
put positions back into the budget.
Otherwise, we conveniently forget the guidelines that allowed 42 positions
to be cut from the S B T a bargainingunit.
I'm not saying any of this as a value statement
against any positions that have been spoken about tonight or
positions that were added back into the budget last year.
I'm also not saying that you should refrain from listening
to comments that you hear from the public or employees.
Employees, what I'm advocating for now.
Is that it would be wise to have a process
to advocate for individual positions in the budget proposal.
The board has the most zoomed out scope of the
district.
And debates over individual positions, both within our unit and
outside of it require a much more granular view than.
What is expected of board members?
We're hearing tonight that the board does not have all
the information about impacts of individual positions.
Positions on programming. And why would you, that's not your
job.
That's our job and that's the job of administrators.
So when you're discussing impacts of individual positions in granular
detail, you have a duty to speak about impacts and
unmet needs with multiple stakeholders across levels. So central office
employees, administrators, teachers, ed techs, custodial staff, et cetera.
Whoever the relevant people are for an individual position.
If these conversations don't happen, you'll be making impactful decisions
with incomplete information.
This unintentional precedent is a failure of process.
The board has the ability to correct this, not only
for this year, but in future years.
If you believe that there is an unmet need in
our district because of the removal of a, of a
particular position.
Our educators. Welcome your questions and consultation about programming.
Even if the process, the board uses to speak about
individual positions is informal. It needs to be clear to
us and clear to all impacted individuals. The criteria used
to choose one position instead of another.
Now that you're unions and state reps have found a
way to acquire some more money.
How will you choose which positions come back?
Is it based on who you've had personal conversations with?
Or who you've received the most emails about.
If I'm ignorant of an existing process, I'm curious if
someone can speak to the details 30 seconds. Thank you.
Is such a process the same for all board members.
If the board makes these decisions without a pragmatic process,
it puts our union in an extremely difficult position.
Do we tell members to rally as many people as
they can to email on their behalf in order to
save their position.
Do we stand at the podium and speak in favor
of some positions, but not all.
This is a weakness in our budget process. And I
urge the board to consider their actions before setting a
precedent founded on volume.
Both in decibel and quantity. Thank you.
Perfect three minutes. Thank
hi, my name is Karine Altham. I'm the librarian at
brown school of very proud to have worked in this
city for.
15 years I'm standing at the mic today.
To implore you to give our elementary school teachers time.
To prepare for this, these huge changes.
Changes. I don't know who my boss will be next
year. I don't know what grade level I will teach.
I don't know who is going to come to.
The school where I work, which I also don't know.
I started teaching. My first week of teaching high school
was.
A nine 11.
My we taught through COVID and these are other days
that I compare to these days.
And I can just, I want to encourage to just.
Reinforce the fact to the parents who are in the
room that your kids are going to be okay.
Because we are an amazing group of educators.
Educators that even though it's four months.
We will be ready.
That being said, we need some time.
And you don't have the money.
I'm gonna need to leave the beach.
so
please give us the time that we need.
Parents. I'm sorry. About the half day, my kids can
both drive and one can drink soap but I
know what it's like to be a mom who has
nowhere for her kids to go during from that half
day. So I wouldn't implore you to.
Help each other.
I really would like you to put those half days
in to be Frank.
I think we need them.
But we did COVID teaching in about two weeks. So
there's really nothing we can't do, but I just wish.
My memo used to say, God would never give me
anything I can't handle. I wish he just wouldn't trust
me so much.
Which is funny to quote as an atheist, but.
Anyway, please give us time. I'm sorry for making jokes,
but this is how I deal with stress.
And
I just love this city. It reminds me of this
city where I grew up, which was Brockton, Massachusetts. And
I'm gonna stay here as long as you let me.
And my friend, Kate and I went to this.
State house last week to get some money.
And I'm, I'm asking you publicly to not put that
in the fund balance.
To bring some of our jobs back.
Because we really need them. Thanks, bye.
Hi, my name is Chelsea smirky. I'm a mom of
two boys in kindergarten and second grade.
Also every week.
Several times a week. I.
Substitute, primarily in the FLS classrooms, five of them in
three different schools.
And I wanna talk a little bit about how important
the OT is in these classrooms.
Classrooms, they offer something different. OTs are special. They need
a master's degree to do what they do.
They ha they use evidence-based practice to create, to create
individual and holistic plans for these children that can look
like anything from working on toileting and self feeding.
To creating sensory diets.
Diets that look at impulse control, sensory processing.
Self-regulation finding gross motor.
Without these roles.
Your instances of unprovoked violence.
Running and eloping in the hallways are going to increase
from what they are now.
You currently have six positions that are vacant.
That's why I'm able to work any day of the
week that I'm available in one of these classrooms.
Classrooms. They are hard and they are going to be
harder without the OT there to help mitigate these.
Behaviors and those vacancies are going to get greater.
These classrooms are also all K through four classrooms.
Classrooms. And I question before making your decision on Monday.
Did any of you reach out to any of those
educators to see how they felt about this?
The reason the extended school year program happens is because
these kids aren't good with transitions. They need that structure.
To reduce any
regressions that they're going to have. You've heard that Mondays
are hard.
Days back from vacation are hard.
First day of school, September was really hard.
We a teacher, I'm sorry, an ed tech. And one
of those classrooms left the first week of school.
They didn't come back in. That position was not filled.
How do they feel about this? Getting separated now? K
through one.
And two through four. There's a reason why those kids
are in one classroom together with the same staff. So
I ask, did you talk to them before making that
decision?
Thank you.
Hi, Abby Keenan.
I have a lot that I wanna say, and I
don't even know where to start. I'll probably.
Send other thoughts and an email to some of you,
but.
I'm trying to keep it pointed and questions.
Questions because I don't understand a lot of things that.
Have been going on and I am someone who pays
a lot of attention to details.
Details and
it's kind of frustrating when it feels like a lot
of the answers are we'll figure it out, but like
that's not.
Helpful in my brain at least.
So
some of the things that I.
Wanted to ask today was.
And they're not in any particular order, but.
On, and I have all this written down for you.
Cause I know you like these numbers and things. Call
center too.
Line 1479.
In the budget, like
like the whole little budget thing.
What it lists, like, I don't understand the difference between,
like, what is the K through eight special education?
Like budget number.
Like
versus the separate schools.
How it's budgeted for special ed like K through eight.
And similarly, because there's, it seems like it's separated out,
but I don't know why. And it's a significant amount
of money.
And then similarly to the.
Some of the roles, I think.
That I don't understand.
What they
really ours, like the K through.
Eight assistant principal K through eight.
Like of teaching and something. There's one at the K
through eight and then.
Assistant principal of teaching at the high school level. I
don't.
Don't know what that I know. I can go and
look and find it online, but it just.
Would be helpful? Like, what is that? Why do we
have that?
Oh, gosh, so many things.
There's also, I guess I was kind of very closely
looking through the budget and I noticed that.
There was a very significant increase in.
Amount allotted to this coming.
Year for substitute teachers.
Teachers like a lot of money.
Compared to last year. And then the year before that,
so I like did a lot of different calculations and.
Like
I don't even know where it is. I have so
many things written down, but it was basically.
An increase.
In
oh, dang it. Where is it?
Hold on.
Here it is. Okay.
From the, the increase in money allotted for.
Substitute teachers across all the different schools and special ed.
Is 216, say 217,000 compared to the.
FY 25 to 26. It only rose by 53.
Thousand, which is a difference of 165,000.
$163,000.
That's a lot of substitute teaching and I know they
don't make anything like I've wanted to do that and
it's not really even worth.
Anyone. It's just ridiculous, but.
So I wonder why that is not, these are not
rhetorical questions. I really wanna understand like why that is
so much higher. And if we can use that money
to save like the RAs and all these other ed
tech positions, that 32nd don't.
Don't and then there's another line item.
2320 assessment services. System-wide.
Was another like difference in.
Years the year passed was a change of 70,000 and
together that's like $225,000. That's a lot of money.
I don't know. I have so much more to say,
but.
I don't, I don't know. I even debated not coming,
cuz it feels like.
It's
I listen at home and I wish I was away
for people to.
Speak from their homes. Cause that's three minutes. It's important.
Thank you. Thank you.
My name is Jamie Watson. I've been a teacher for
22 years.
In the district. And like I said before,
this is my second time going through this process.
But I would still choose south Portland.
To teach in.
I'm frustrating, a statement from another related arts teacher who
could not be here tonight.
Equity was the buzzword of Monday night's meeting. However, our
budget cuts and budget process seemed to be anything, but
at SPMS in particular, our related arts team was decimated
in the most recent round of budget cuts. We eliminated
a five, six PT, a seven eight P teacher, a
computer science teacher.
Of percussion, a percussion ed tech and just one of
two stem teachers in the entire district. Most of these
positions were teaching classes that all students and all programs
can be a part of.
Students in ES O L and all special education programs
are welcomed in and thrive in our classes. And the
elimination of half the related arts classes accessible to these
students is devastating.
Equity is the focus and should remain the focus of
south Portland schools.
As we continue to move through this difficult budget process,
I urge you to consider what positions we'll provide all
students with equal opportunities to find their sense of belonging
and develop as student individuals. And they just had three
questions.
Questions. Why are we focused on eliminating RA positions alone
at S SPMS? When the high school has the same
enrollment yet more RA elective course offerings. Students at SPMS
deserve to have similar opportunities with related arts classes, which
lead to a stronger sensible belonging for all students in
the community community.
These cuts seem very hasty and look to displace many
students. Has there been any thought to how these cuts
will impact schedules class sizes at the middle school?
Why has it even, why, excuse me. Why has it
even been a question in whether we ask the city
council to allocate more funds for our schools?
South Portland is among the cities with the lowest percentage
of taxpayer dollars. Going towards school, we sit at just
56%.
Many other schools in the surrounding areas are sitting around
60% of more.
Some of these schools receive less state funding than south
Portland does, but those are still some numbers worth considering.
They state Gorm is at 62%. Yarmouth is at 71%.
Cape as close to 70 and Westbrook sits at 58%.
So that was her statement. Now this is mine.
Thank you superintendent. And what at Wenzel for acknowledging the
impact of this situation and for recognizing the current challenges.
Challenges are not the result of actions taken by teachers
or support staff.
Related arts classes in middle school are not extras. They
are essential. They strengthen academic performance by improving focus, memory
and engagement. While also giving students critical outlets to manage
stress and build confidence for many students, these classes are
where they experience this success, which drives better attendance and
fewer behavioral issues.
Issues beyond academics related arts developed skills. That core classes
alone cannot.
Teamwork, creativity and problem solving.
They also give students the opportunity to explore interests and
discover strengths during a critical stage of development.
This year later, arts of the middle school have been
significantly impacted by reductions the loss of four related art
positions.
Positions. And then also the beloved.
Percussion teacher that's three minutes. Jamie, my girl. Thanks. Thank
you. Oh,
Jen Fletcher. Okay. SPMS teacher. I yield my time.
Physical education currently, 71% of our students at S SPMS
participate in PE year round.
Under the proposed changes, students will only have PE one
semester.
This represents a significant shift that may negatively affect students'
mental health, academic performance.
Memory classroom behavior and overall engagement while also increasing the
risk of burnout during extended academic blocks.
My role as a PE teacher was cut. I teach
PE grade six, seven, and eight, and I also teach
eighth grade health. I teach a math flex. I teach
a literacy win time flex, and I also teach an
advisory.
In addition to my teaching responsibilities, my athletic liaison position
was cut from the budget. I, I don't know where
it was cut from, cause I can't find it anywhere
in the budget, but I think it's probably under stipend
somewhere. This is a, this role has been a limitated
and my responsibility include supporting families through registration and medical
clearance.
Serving as a primary point of contact for student athletes,
communicating with parents, communicating with transportation coaches, overseeing that students
get on the right buses in a timely manner. So
those buses can come back to skill and to pick
tho those kids on time. I advocate for, for students
who cannot get a equipment for the, their self student
to their families circumstances.
Our second PE teacher. He was our unified adaptive PE
teacher who was our unified basketball co coach, which he.
Started that up this year, he was also our advisor
for special Olympics and organized both of those things.
He also teaches grade six.
Seven and fifth grade.
And he also has an advisory. Our stem teacher.
She's also our varsity lacrosse coach. I think you've heard
that's probably not gonna be happening when she finds another
job or maybe it will. If she comes back our
computer science teacher, you've heard he does biking, eSports steam
club, and he fosters and engagement for innovation and belonging.
And then our percussion teacher.
We all know what he does. Everybody loves him. And
he, he instructs 70 students and supports 500 instrumental students,
grade five through 12.
Please note that our related arts team has not been
given a rationale behind these decisions or how the remaining
related arts teachers will be responsible for teaching more classes.
Assessing more students and plan for more grade levels, all
with less planning time.
It has also been stated that all students at SPMS
are exposed to related arts, however, that is not consistently
happening in, in practice.
Just this morning, we're walking a seventh grade student to
stem. She shared that she has never been down that
hallway because she's never had stem or art.
This raises a serious concern. How can a student nearing
the end of her third year at south Portland, middle
school, have no exposure to art or stem.
On behalf of the seventh and eighth grade staff members,
I represent for the S P T a, we respectfully
ask the following.
With enrollment down. How have we looked at the director
positions we had before COVID and see why now we
need them, but did not need them in 2019.
How did the nutrition director overspend so much less than
six year? If the director was overseeing them?
With a district considered placing a reprimand of question on
the ballot to better understand commuting voting patterns. For example,
our budget decisions being driven by concerns and overall cost,
school closures, reconfiguration, or other factors gaining this insight could
help improve inform future planning and decision making. I'm sorry
for going over, but thank you.
Good evening members of the school board.
Thank you very much to all the teachers and staff.
For all your time and for you guys time as
well. I really do appreciate it. My name's Alex Hoyt.
I'm a husband, a father.
And a south Portland resident.
Thank you for removing the half day request from today's
ad agenda.
It's very much appreciated. And honestly, it seems like the
first time we were listened to in a, in a
very rapid manner. So thank you.
The theme though, that continues to surface for me.
Still applies. And that theme is too little too late.
We saw an essentially unanimous decision amongst our board members
to move forward with elementary school reconfiguration. One of the
most significant changes this district has undertaken and in record
time,
this almost immediately followed by the request on behalf of
the district to add four additional half days to the
school calendar in may and June of 2026.
If additional time was needed, that should have been accounted
for from the outset.
To me, this is more than a scheduling.
Adjustment. It's an early signal.
When a plan requires additional time almost immediately after being
approved.
It calls into question whether the original timeline was fully
grounded and the realities.
Of execution. And if the process is already being stretched
in April,
this reasonable to question whether reconfiguration can be carried out
in a clean, efficient, and stable manner.
By August.
After Monday's meeting. In addition to the half day request,
I received a flyer announcing upcoming community.
Input sessions intended to gather feedback from parents and staff
related to reconfiguration.
While the intent and effort is appreciated.
The timing of this raises more concerns for me.
This type of engagement should have been.
Foundational to the process months ago, not something introduced after
a decision had already been made.
Community input should help shape a proposal. Not follow it.
How that occurred earlier and how it occurred with repetition.
A lot more. It may have provided stronger direction and
a clearer understanding of whether there was a meaningful public
support for option a again, too little too late.
Stepping back. This raises a broader concern about readiness. A
plan of this scale requires clear coordination and a well-supported
timeline.
My suggestion is that attendance boundaries, school assignments, transportation planning,
facility adjustments, along with associated costs. Be clearly outlined prior
to the city council meeting. 30 seconds, Alex, April 7th or
14th. I don't know what it is now in Louis
lieu of feasibility study, which other main school districts have
con conducted prior to even.
Considering reconfiguration, I think asking for a detailed plan, identifying
steps and figures in is an extremely reasonable and very
basic request. I wanna support this effort. I really do,
but I cannot support a plan that lacks a clear
timeline to find an implementation, meaning meaningful community input at
the appropriate stage.
Please do not vote in favor.
Or I should say, please reconsider your previous approval for
reconfiguration. I know that the teachers can do this.
I'm concerned that it's not gonna be done in the
best way possible.
Hello, Charlie Fox me again. up here.
It's like kind of Groundhog day all over again.
What's up guys. So I sent out all you an
email. I asked for a few of you up there
for your resignation, because I thought you were not.
Fit for this job, which I think a lot of
us up here feel that you're not fit for this
job, unfortunately, to say.
We've heard overwhelming.
For the past month now about concerns for Confederate teachers.
You know, psychologists specialists.
All these people coming up here and none of our.
Information has been taken to heart.
You guys just can clearly just blow past it and
make a decision.
Off of thinking that it's gonna cause more equity across.
All south Portland, we looked at the boundary lines and
trying to figure out how this is gonna happen.
I, my son goes a dire.
So does that mean dire is gonna go to the
skill ends now?
Because that's not creating more equity across the town. Are
we gonna bring small, go across the other side of
the schools?
Like it doesn't, it, it, it doesn't make sense. There
is no information. There's no guidelines. We want guidelines. We
want, know how it's gonna happen.
I walked my son to school this week, multiple times.
And.
All the parents who have first graders were.
Devastated that their kids will not be going to dire
next year.
Some of 'em were more concerned that they don't know
how they're gonna get a kid to die.
Dier. I mean, one kid to Dier and one kid
to another school. I have a grant grandparent who lives
right next to me and brings their grandchildren to school.
She doesn't even know how she's gonna be able to
get her other grandchildren who go to Scarborough or her
husband rings.
Rings. And then there are the kids across town.
There is no real guidance.
And to go off of what Alex has pointed out
just now it's like,
there's a lot of concerns adding the, the.
Half days ends showing that you guys are not ready
for this. It's okay to admit you're not ready.
But just sit here and push it through.
Is not okay.
And it's extremely frustrating.
I've also heard that people keep saying kids are resilient.
Resilient. I am so sick of that. It's it's like,
you don't have young children. If you're saying kids are
resilient because like,
kids are emotional. .
Especially elementary school kids. It's exhausting.
All right.
So kids aren't resilient and parents aren't resilient and we're
going through a lot. We have a lot of bills.
Costs is everything going up, gas is going up. Everything's
going up around us and you're expecting us to take
this on and say, kids are gonna be resilient. So
we are, and be fine.
Fine. It's not that's three minutes. I have one last
question.
For ish over here, you did not give us an
answer. Why you chose reconfiguration, you bypassed it. You said
you could not give us an answer. I wanna answer
why you chose reconfiguration, because when we talk to you,
you said you were not gonna choose to do it.
And you did.
Thank you. Thank you.
I am Eva Morin and I am here to speak
about the related art teachers and.
The percussion ed tech, the percussion ed tech at our
schools.
This sees, not just middle schoolers, but also high schoolers,
grades five through T through 12.
That is like the most student facing position you can
have.
I see him. And so do students.
Students who are like, not half my age, but like,
really small .
This position has been at our school since before the
previous band teacher.
Who got here. And he was here for over 30
years.
This position has been a core part of our school
for a very long time.
Any cuts to the music program.
Will be felt throughout the entire program.
Percussion is very different.
From the rest of the band, but it is still
very important.
And take special and specific direction.
Additionally
related arts in general are very important to schools.
As there make as there, what makes school like.
Like fun and
fun for so many students.
Students this year I had painting and it's so.
Nice to have a break from my day from all
of my core classes.
And it's very sad to think that students like me
will not have this experience because we're taking away an
art teacher position at our school.
Additionally, the computer science.
Position at the middle school.
Was being cut and this position was.
And this teacher showed
reminded me how fun computer science was. I had some
experiences with it in.
Elementary school, but in middle school,
the door was opened much wider and we were able
to.
Experience much more.
In depth learning with this subject.
Which was really nice as.
Computer science will be a main, like part.
Of the
world going further with AI and other services becoming more
widespread.
This class helped me realize that computer science is an
interest I might have. I have.
And that it could possibly be a career choice for
me. And without related arts opportunities, students will, will, will
not be able to figure out.
Possibly what they wanna do later in life and experience
like, and not have experiences.
That could alter like what they want to do.
You have 30 seconds more.
Related arts classes provide a break from, for students from
traditional learning.
And classes, which makes the school day a lot more
fun and worthwhile.
Additionally
I know the schools have the statement belong here in
chief anywhere.
But that can really only happen when we have related
arts classes for students to feel like they are, can
truly be like represented.
In the school and feel like.
They can do things other than just the core subjects
that aren't.
Aren't cuz those subjects aren't the most popular within school.
Usually for most students.
Students that's three minutes. Thanks.
Hello.
My name is Dr. Caitlin Foley. I had no intention
of coming down tonight or attending other meetings. I've found
them too taxing on my mental health, but I was
listening at home.
And like my neighbors, I felt I needed to come
and talk. I have no notes. I have no handouts
this time. You've heard my spiel on what I do,
but.
I want to talk to you about my most important
expertise, which is my daughter, Zoe.
Zoe is in the fifth grade at the middle school.
And she is really excited about space.
Right around kindergarten, we started watching cosmos with Neil Degrass
Tyson.
And he is her hero and she wants to be
an astrophysicist.
I don't know how many people got really excited about
the Artemis.
To lift off this week, but if you're in fifth
grade, your mom only tells you about 26 hours before
it takes off. Cuz then you count down every hour
until then.
And she literally watched the live feed for three hours
yesterday, cuz she had to see it take off.
This last fall, she didn't get into stem.
And I wasn't really worried. Like I knew that they
take some related arts in the fall and some in
the spring.
And then when her schedule came out for the spring
stem wasn't on it.
And so I emailed Aaliyah Starr and I said, is
this, this mistake?
She like, she's so excited. She wants to be in
stem. She wants to be an astrophysicist. It's all she
talks about.
And Aaliyah explained to me and I was fine with
it. Like sometimes it doesn't work out. She's also in
chorus and band. I'm like, okay. And she said, we
do our best. We'll get her in next year.
But if we don't have enough stem teachers,
teachers and we don't have enough computer science teachers.
Teachers, I don't know how my kid gets to be
an astrophysicist.
So, I guess I'm asking that you.
Reconsider that thank you.
Lauren Shapiro Deek street.
It was my understanding in the first budget meeting with
the city council that a 6% budget increase was recommended,
but not set in stone.
Could you please detail what the school board's next steps
will be during the upcoming meeting with counsel.
What are your asks? Will you ask to increase the
budget or seek funding through the city to bring back
jobs and avoid school closure?
Reconfiguration regarding logistics.
Logistics, what would be the cap on length of bus
ride for our youngest learners? Do elementary riders currently have
bus aides.
Will there be additional bus aids needed.
It, if so, how many and what is the cost
to support additional aids?
Does the city have data on busing and outcomes in
regards to length of ride and width versus without bus
aids for elementary age riders.
Riders will staff and parents be able to request a
change if assigned school, doesn't meet educators.
Educators Childs or family needs logistically or otherwise.
Will the district need to honor these requests.
Requests. I am here tonight to call a vote of
no confidence in the advancement of the proposed budget, as
it stands.
That lack of confidence is rooted not only in the
substance of the proposal, but in how this process has
been conducted.
This is not limited to a single meeting. It reflects
a consistent pattern of limited.
Transparency incomplete responses to community concerns.
Concerns and a rushed agenda.
What many of us experienced at the last meeting was
simply a continuation of that pattern.
Where the majority of question questions raised were left unanswered.
The data presented on Monday, raises pressing questions. The achievement
charts presented appear to tell a very different story.
Than the one being used to justify this fast.
Tracked agenda. From what I understand, those charges suggest that
class size plays a significant role in student outcomes.
Outcomes. So I ask again and more pointedly.
Did class sizes at Kayla and skilling decrease between 2024
and 2025.
While class sizes at brown and small.
Increased does that data show that smaller class sizes correlate
with higher student?
Performance and larger class sizes with lower performance.
If the answers are. Yes.
Then the data directly contradicts the direction of this proposal.
Considering school closure will result in increased class sizes. With
these class size changes combined with loss of staff. What
are the expectations of student and staff performance and outcomes
have educat educators been asked what this means for their
class classroom and needs.
Have they been reassured, there is a concrete plan to
fill the inevitable.
New gaps. And if not, who is tasked with that
job?
Regarding the slide on the achievement between bipo students and
white students. I ask again.
What percentage of those students or English as a second
language learners, previous Lauren.
My name is Leah Rovner. I'm a parent to a
kindergartner at small school and an incoming.
Well in another year, kindergartner, I yield my time. Thank
you.
Language acquisition alone can significantly impact academic outcomes. And without
that context, the data is incomplete and misleading.
If all of these questions and those of other community
members cannot currently be answered, we are not prepared to
move forward with drastic.
Change. We are repeatedly told that children are resilient.
Resilient as if that alone is sufficient justification to accelerate
sweeping changes.
Changes to elementary education.
But resilience should never be used as a rationale to
impose disruption without careful consideration.
Just because children can adapt.
Does not mean that it is harmless or in their
best interest.
What may be manageable for some children.
Can deeply be deeply destabilizing for others. That's your time?
Oh, I'm sorry. You can continue.
You speak about inequities tied to race and socioeconomic status
across neighborhoods.
Neighborhoods, but this plan risks creating a new set of
inequities by uprooting children from their schools and communities. We
are ignoring the needs of those who depend on stability.
Familiarity and continuity to succeed.
Equity must include them too.
I also wanna address a comparison that has been raised
that many adults experience changing schools in their youth and
turned out fine.
That perspective, overlooks the reality, our children face today.
The world has changed screens. Now dominate both classrooms and
home life. Children are navigating mental health challenges at higher
rates than previous generations.
Anxiety and depression have reached epidemic proportions.
This is not the time to swiftly uproot our youngest
children.
Closing a school and pushing forward with reconfiguration so fast
and forcefully.
Does not just shift buildings. It disrupts lives.
It removes children and staff from the communities where they
feel safe and connected.
It fragments relationships with all the support systems.
In many ways, it mirrors situations where people are displaced
without a voice or choice.
Where decisions are made for them, not with them.
That is not how a community centered school system should
operate.
The process is rushed forced forward without the level of
transparency.
Transparency community engagement and thoughtful deliberation its magnitude demands.
Demands. I urge a deep, long thoughtful pause.
The current plan doesn't work for us. And we are
begging you to do better.
Your responsibility is not just to make decision decisions.
Decisions efficiently, but to make them wisely compassionately and with
the full trust of the community. Thank you.
Meredith diamond parent.
Diamond's parent community member educator.
My question tonight is how many of you have noticed
that we are flying blind?
I'm wondering how many of you can recognize that you
are making decisions about people's lives and livelihood.
The programming our kids can access.
And the beating hearts at the center of our neighborhoods.
Neighborhoods without a baseline of data that defends these cuts
as reasonable.
How can we decide to make cuts without considering data
connected to them?
If the Dean of students at the high school is
responsible for attendance.
Why aren't we considering the impact of that position on
attendance rates before and after?
If we're talking about a behavior specialist.
Why aren't we talking about the number of behavior plans?
Plans currently implemented throughout our elementary schools and identify.
How those will be maintained with reduced staff.
If we are talking about improving equity.
Why aren't we looking at data that could identify.
Needs and leverage points.
In my work as a district in building administrator.
I never asked.
A board to trust me when it came to reasoning
for cuts.
Cuts instead I poured over the quantifiable.
To render transparent the reality of our building and the
impacts of the losses.
Why aren't we doing the same?
Why are we settling for less?
How can you vote in favor of these cuts?
Cuts when the explanation offered for them is trust us.
When I reflect on how this conversation has evolved. The
turning point was when we started talking about reconfigure reconfiguration
as an equity initiative.
This is a manipulation and a lie.
It is a misrepresentation of why equity is important and
what it will require.
True equity work costs money.
What about increasing class sizes most dramatically at our highest
needs schools.
Eliminating access to opportunity creating programming.
And dividing families is going to create more equitable learning
for our students.
Students, we have seen no data.
Substantiating what reconfiguration will actually accomplish.
If you want to plan true equity initiatives.
Initiatives ask for this data 30 seconds.
One attendance rates in chronic absenteeism.
Disaggregated by race, income, disability, status and English learner status,
two grade retention rates by subgroup three enrollment by gifted
and advanced programs by subgroup.
Four access to arts music, PE enrichment programs by subgroup.
Five detention and suspension rates by race and disability status.
Six student and family perceptions of safety and belonging by
subgroup.
Seven bullying and harassment incidents rates by subgroups.
Subgroups eight counselor to student ratios and access rates by
subgroups.
Subgroups Sam diamond. I yield my time.
To close.
I have two ideas for you and one request.
Idea number one.
Insist on hearing the FY 25 audit report.
Before you vote on the FY 27 budget.
Last year, this came at the end of March.
Ask direct questions during that report.
That will help us understand what has happened.
To create this dire ind destructive circumstance.
Idea number two.
Pause reconfiguration and take six months to gather actual data.
That will let us understand how to reconfigure in a
way that will have a positive.
Rather than a negative impact.
On learning of our highest needs learners.
Learners in the meantime, use the substantial sum that reconfiguration
will inevitably cost. I think as evidenced by the time
cost that is obviously already consuming our central office.
To restore some of the services that these cuts have
taken away from our highest needs students.
Students, the very students, we should be serving more equitably.
And my request, please.
Please stop calling reconfiguration and equity initiative.
It's an insulting lie that we all see through.
Thank you. Yes.
Hello. My name is Ishmael Daniels. I'm Akay parent to
a second grader.
Thank you to the board.
This is hard.
You guys are getting attacked. It's hard.
It feels personal. I know.
And I appreciate you guys being up there doing what
you gotta do.
Thank you to all the parents, all the teachers.
Teachers, all the loved ones, everyone that shows up.
I appreciate everybody, but I'm gonna single out a few
people today.
First I'd like to say, thank you.
To Mr. Feller, you asked a lot of hard questions
today. It seems like you.
Put some planning in ahead.
You asked some real world real person questions.
Questions. And I appreciate that.
I see you, you, you, you, you, you did your
thing. You, you did your thing.
Ms. Richardson.
You as well, you asked a lot of hard questions.
Questions you push back. I like that.
You know, you, you, you don't just go with the
status quo and you guys are dealing with it. It's
tough.
I sit in the audience.
I know it's hard. I smoked a cigarette today.
I don't smoke cigarettes. Right.
So I get it.
And I know
you know, you, you guys are getting.
Coming it's coming from every direction.
Right, but I wanted to say, thank you.
I just wanted to say thank you for sitting up
there.
You're dealing with a lot of people's emotions cuz we're
dealing with our children.
You know, you know, the old saying, would you kill
for your kids?
Hey. Hey.
So
like I said, I wanted to say thank you to
all the teachers and everything, but I wanna mention a
few teachers over at the Taylor school. Mm-hmm miss
Siegel.
Thank you for kindergarten.
Mr. Graffs and Ms. Duddy.
Thank you for first grade, Ms. Stewart. Thank you for
second grade. That's personal to me cuz that's those are
the teachers that helped my daughter get to where she
is today.
Thank you, Kayla PTA.
I'm the only man on Taylor PTA. I don't mind
standing out. .
Right. I'm the only male on Taylor PTA.
And we're here for you guys. We're here for everybody.
So that being said,
Kayla, gear's gonna go back on sale for anybody who
wants nostalgic gear, we're gonna sell it cheap.
And we're gonna have one hell of an we're gonna
have one hell of an end of a year.
To be determined and announced, but there will be a
shindig.
I said project X, but they're a little young for
that.
And that's my time.
But I just wanted to mention you guys personally.
You know, I see you. We all see you.
Sorry, Mallory. I did smoke a cigarette.
Thank you. Thank you, Ishmael. Thank you.
Is there anyone else who'd like to speak?
We have an email from one of our board members,
Angela Kabisa who couldn't be here tonight. So I'm gonna.
Ask Mr. Dowling to read that.
Certainly
from board member.
Kabisa dear members of the community.
First, I want to apologize for being not able to
come to tonight's meeting.
People lied when they said senior year would be easy.
.
I'm writing as a member of this community to share
my thoughts on the proposed reconfiguration and the possible loss
of key positions in our schools.
Reconfiguration isn't just about numbers or buildings.
Buildings it affects students' everyday lives.
It affects where they feel comfortable.
Where they feel known and how supported they are.
I hope that as decisions are being made.
We keep students at the center and think about the
real impact these changes will have on them.
I also want to speak about the D E I
position.
For many students, including me.
This role is part of what makes them feel seen
and understood in school.
It's something that helps build a school environment where everyone
feels like they belong.
Losing that would be a step backward.
The same goes for positions.
Positions like the percussion educational technicians.
The arts matter music programs give students a place to
express themselves.
Build confidence and feel connected to something bigger.
And ed techs are such an important part of classrooms.
Classrooms. They support students every single day in ways that
often go unseen.
But make a huge difference. I've experienced it as a
new music student.
I know these are not easy decisions.
Decisions. And I understand there are real constraints.
Constraints, but I hope we don't lose sight of what
makes our schools strong in the first place.
For board members. I hope.
As you hopefully vote for the budget tonight.
I ask that you listen to the public.
And remember that our goal is to serve the people
in ways that can make the majority happy.
I know it's hard, but you got it.
No matter what race, where you're from.
Or how privileged you may or may not be.
Your voice matters.
More than anything. I hope our community can come together
during this time.
These conversations can be difficult, but they're also an opportunity
for us to support one another.
Listen to different perspectives.
Perspectives and work towards solutions that reflect our shared values.
I thank the community for always being one who supports
one another.
Not just thinking about themselves.
But the people around them, it is rare to find
that in many places,
and that is what makes south Portland special.
Sincerely Angela Kabisa.
Kabisa thank you.
She's a good egg .
I, I just wanted to make a comment if I
could.
I, I can say I'm doing my best.
And the comments tonight made by Brian Green.
Were hurtful and painful.
I am not trying.
To cause anyone any hurt or harm.
Maybe it seems
some of us up here don't have feelings, but we
do.
I do
being publicly shamed for trying to do the best I
can is hurtful.
I can accept that. Not everyone agrees with either my
style or my votes. That's okay.
But to say unkind things about me in a public
forum is a hateful act.
I ran for school board.
Twice.
Now because I thought I might have something to offer.
Maybe it seemed funny to you.
And some of you clapped.
But please think about the child in your classroom who
gets teased.
Teased or bullied. That's how.
It feels up here right now.
Especially when no one speaks up for you.
As a lifelong educator, I care deeply about kids and
families.
It's been my life work and I care deeply about
this community.
I never met Mr. Green and I never talked withhim.
But his words cut deeply.
This is hard work and I'm trying to be open,
honest and truthful.
But mostly I'm trying to be kind.
Please know that.
Last night, I was at a training.
Where we talked about the single.
Story. And maybe you think you see me up here
and that you know who I am.
Or, you know, everything about me, but you don't.
Don't you know, one single story.
That's all, you know,
I'm a person who feels deeply, who cares deeply and
who believes deeply.
And please think about how hurtful words can be.
Thank you.
Public comment is closed.
We're at 4.2, which is consideration in action.
To convene a meeting with city council.
Do we want, I'm sorry, Rosemary. We have, we had
a lot of questions. Oh, I'm sorry. No, I know.
It's okay. I know.
I, I did my best to write them down. It's
about.
Four pages worth.
Yeah, we're not gonna
I, I wrote down some too, but how, how do
we.
Well, why don't we start with, I have a, some,
some goes so fast. It's it's difficult.
And some are kind of futuristic questions, but there was
a question that Phil asked about.
Insurance and
we were, we were talking, there was discussion about.
That there was some savings in insurance. And I think
just to explain that.
We have, we have budgeted 12% increase in our insurance.
And actually the only word that we got in terms
of the rate is that we know it's not going
to exceed.
11 and a half percent.
So
Abigail, you don't need to get up if I'm saying
this. Right. But I believe that.
You for that half percent, that was sort of redistributed.
Through the current, through the budget projection.
Because it was really just an estimate to begin with.
Is that right?
apparently not
well, it, it is an estimate to begin with.
Right? We.
The prior year, I think we estimated 5% and then
it came in at 8% and then we struggled.
With that we put in this year, 12%. And then
we just got the cap.
Maxed out at 11 and a half percent.
But we will find out in another couple weeks, what
it will.
Really be, but it won't be more than 11.5%.
Yes. Does that answer it? Okay. Thank you. That doesn't
answer the question.
Which part the question correctly.
Okay. I, I think the question.
Sorry, I'm trying to find your name bill. So we've
got.
Oh, that wasn't your question. I'm sorry. Was that your
question? This was my question. I know what he's referring
to, but that was not asked correctly. Mm-hmm at
all.
It where it went? No, it's not where it went.
The district going against its recommendation.
And savings from the, why was that decision made?
At this time, it
would come at the cost of more personnel.
What the board does with that is a, is a
broader conversation.
I thought it was going into some kind of operational
like maintenance budget. Oh, you mean the difference between the
12% and the 11,000 understood the question.
Yeah. Am I understanding that? Right? The question is between
the 12% and the 11.5, where that went. Okay.
So that was partly absorbed through the personnel shifts that
we made.
And then the rest of that went towards capital project
costs.
Specific to the high school chimney stacks that need.
Work, but I think the question was because originally I
think.
The idea had been, if there had been any x-ray
it would go to starting to towards the fund balance.
Mm-hmm .
So how would I think, right. Is that what you're
asking about? So I think that's specifically.
Specifically about that, right? Mm-hmm so specifically why, why,
why didn't that go to the fund balance? I think
it's the simplest way to put it right.
Mm-hmm . Yeah, I, I think the main reason is
that we have real facilities costs.
That we're trying to fulfill.
Phil. Okay. You want, I think there was another question.
And I probably, maybe I don't have this one. Right.
But it was had to do with.
Grant writing or
or, or fundraising.
And I would, I would just point to.
The middle school as a good example of grants that
get written.
And that fund a good amount. I think if you've
been at other.
Board meetings, you
I, I go through a, a whole list of, of
grants and, and so on. So, so it can work
in schools and it is working in our middle school.
The board voted not too long ago to.
Ex expand our community school strategy.
Into the other schools. And so, and, and so we
will take even more advantage.
As we move forward with that.
There's a related question about the education foundation.
And the status of that, right? Hmm. That's what I
have.
Don't know who can speak to that question. What is
the status of the education foundation? I think jealous clinic,
they continue to, oh,
sure they are on track.
To become a 5 0 1 3 C organization. I think it's really
important for the board and for the public to understand.
That that is designed.
To supplement, not to supplant locally required programming. The foundation
is not there to backfill on operational costs.
But it is to
ensure that we can continue to provide.
The services that we want through the community school model.
So, again, it, it is on track this the.
Group has been working incredibly hard this year.
And we should be up and running for July 1st with
that organization.
Joe, just a follow up on that. What would be
the, an example of the type of thing the foundation
might do?
Sure. So over the last couple years, for instance, our
middle school has engaged in.
Programming like going to Kiev with, with a whole grade
level of teams, outdoor leadership camp team program, that sort
of program that goes above and beyond and is incredibly
enriching that is not funded out of local dollar.
There's also
a question related to when are we hiring the new
superintendent?
Maybe the board chair can answer that.
We are
in the process right now.
And we're doing
preliminary interviews of
of semi-finalists in approximately two weeks.
And then we will be doing finalists.
Interviews about two weeks after that.
And the board will
select from likely two or three finalists.
And bring a candidate forward.
How many current candidates do you have right now?
You don't know yet. I'm not privileged to answer that
question. We're working with a search agency and.
They're keeping right now, we have a closed process.
And
so the candidates are.
Confidential.
That's all. That's all I know, but if I may
say we, we spent three and a half hours yesterday
in a training to learn how to hire in a
non-biased way. So we're really doing our diligence on this
one. We're taking this extremely seriously. We're trying to get
community feedback and it's very important and we know.
It is, this should be conducted by a committee of
stakeholders.
This copy a closed I'm I'm sorry. We're public comment
is closed.
So we're not taking comments from the audience. If you
can just please respect that.
So right now, it's just an opportunity for the.
Board
the superintendent to answer questions.
Questions. Thank you. And
I didn't invite others to, yeah, I have.
Go ahead, Elaine. The first set of questions was.
Regarding the regular ed behavior strategist who will design and
oversee tier three and two MTSS behavior interventions across inter
elementary schools.
Sure. I spoke to that. Some.
Before we anticipate that it will be through the board
certified behavior.
Analysts and also our instructional strategists at this time.
How will we prevent an increase in special ed referrals
without early intervention? And how will we prevent students before
their needs escalate?
How will district ensure safety of staff when students are
aggressive in.
In, in light of the removal of this role.
Sure. So as I think the board and public know.
We have start. We are well on the way to
being a P B I S district. Those practices are
in place at all of our schools.
That involves a data informed process of looking at student
behaviors to identify.
When there is a, a change in an individual student
behavior or in sort of a cohort of students' behaviors.
Behaviors. So we will work with using that data to
identify.
Students at risk and our, our educator teams.
We have standing MTSS practices and teams in our elementary
schools.
That will continue to look at that behavior data.
And work with the experts who we will still have
on our staff.
I'm not sure I got all that question. Alen, if
you feel like there's a part I lost. Yeah. I
think you did the best you can. Okay.
Can you just identify who the.
Who those MTSS roles are in elementary schools.
That you just, sure. So we have three different type
of MTSS roles. We have, what's known as an MTSS,
a.
They serve as a coordinator, kind of.
Across the programming to help us ensure that we're screening.
And using our universal screeners to identify students.
Students who are either experiencing.
The need for escalated services or a change in services.
And then there's also literacy specialists and math specialists, or
the three roles at the elementary level.
Okay.
Joe, I have a question. Sure. A question about.
Well, there was a question about alignment amongst board members.
I'm not sure what that meant, but.
There was a question about how much savings was based
on transportation.
I don't, I don't know that we have that information,
but I have that one. That's one of the questions
and I, I'm sorry. I'm not sure I understand exactly.
Savings from what UNT transportation in the moving forward in
this reconfiguration, are there savings in transportation based on this.
And I don't think we have that information, if you
sure we are working with the consultant to you, our
existing fleet of driver and buses and bus.
Aides. I know, came up as a question as well.
And we had a question about, is there money?
Available to build bathrooms and I don't.
Don't sure we're aware of the regulations for our youngest
learners. So pre-K has a different set of regulations and
then the regulations.
For students in kindergarten.
And again, our
not concerned about the ability to make our buildings suitable
for those needs.
There was another question about how many special ed students
are placed outside of the district? Sure. We currently at
this moment have six students who are placed outside of
the district. The average.
Cost of an, a, a placement out of district.
Is between a hundred thousand and 125,000, say six. I'm
sorry. We have six students. Yes.
Currently can, can you explain what that means? Because I
don't like, why, why, how does that happen?
Like sure. So with special education, our goal is always
that least restrictive environment, meaning they're with their typically developing.
Peers as much of the day as possible.
However, depending on a child's needs.
They may be in a more self-contained classroom.
And then there are some students for whom that is
still not enough of a therapeutic.
And specialized program.
And so that's where we partner with.
A program, not on our campus.
They are around the region and around the state.
And the, the student attends school there, but is considered
a resident student of south Portland.
And we are obligated to fund the, that entire.
Correct. Mm-hmm we fund, we fund that cost and
we fund transportation for that student. If they're needing to
travel to Lewiston, to a program.
Thanks. Thank you.
I have some que I mean, yeah, no, I have
some, let me just see if I can finish and
then I can go. Okay. I'm sorry. I was just
trying to help you. That's all right. Thank you. I
appreciate it.
There was some questions about.
The, the process, the reconfiguration process.
And where, where do, where do staff members get details
about it? And.
Where to teachers get in information on.
Where their position is going to be going forward.
Sure. And I spoke about the fact that that's starting
with a survey that is going out tomorrow to appear
from staff as to where they would like to be.
And then our hope is to work on getting that.
Resolved as quickly as possible. We know it's the highest
priority for our staff.
To be able to help them plan.
And then also to bring those teams together as we
can.
There was a question about why substitute.
Why the line for substitutes was so high. I, I
think it's a really similar to the other two examples
Abigail gave, I, I do think it's been under budgeted.
If you look at actuals, it's kind of a modest
increase, but substitute need have generally increased as the number
of leaves, sleeves of absences for a variety.
Of reasons have also gone up. So there's more subs.
Naturally because of that.
Thank you.
And there were a number of questions about.
Going forward about
well first
detail what the purpose is with the city council. Do
you want me to answer that one? I think that'd
be a better question for you. Oh, okay.
That, that, that will be determined when we take this
next budget item, because I don't, I can't answer that
until the board decides what, what it wants to do
at that meeting. So that will, that, that's the next,
that's the next action item on a, our agenda.
Questions about
busing, will there be bus aids and what will be
the data on the length of rides?
Rides. Sure. So we currently.
Have seven full-time bus aides, and we.
Do use spare bus aids as well. We anticipate that
the seven full-time folks will continue.
Those spares. We want to be more thoughtful about ensuring.
The use of that time. And so we would only
use that in the instance of absences.
Absences or if an IEP need dictates.
Adult support on transportation.
So again, at this point, we are building our assumptions
of transportation routes with our current fleet of both vehicles
and staff.
And hopefully within the next few weeks, we'll be able
to give the community a better update on exactly those
buses, but we've heard the concern loud and clear from
the community that bus time.
Are a, a really essential variable for them. So we
will hold that as we work on this.
Thank you.
There was another question about whether.
I, I think it was an Eleni may have gotten
this.
Clearer, but did classes decrease at Calor? I, I think
it was class size. Did class size decrease at Calor
and sure. There's been no substantial change in class sizes
at K and skill. About three years of ago, the
board did.
Sort of at the tail end of boundaries and configurations
did commit to.
Protecting class sizes there, but there was no change in
the data.
Between the, I, I, I think that question was about
the academic data.
In 24, 25, there was.
No substantial difference in class size there.
Okay.
Member Richardson. Did you have more?
Yes, Sarah Gay kind of reiterated the questions from last time
that were not answered. Yeah, I didn't get those down,
but please share any peer reviewed research, professional publications or
any expert references in the district.
Were board that have been referenced to draw the conclusion
that one elementary school is a model is better for
kids than the other.
Sure earlier, we, we shared some of that, but I
can work to re elevate it into the slide deck.
So I, I will make a note of that.
How much funding is time, how much funding and time
is being allocated for summer transition work for ES staff.
And when will that take place?
I based on the board's.
Removing the proposal of the early release days today, we're
going to need to reconsider that and come, come back
to you with new figures on that.
This is a tough one. regarding our shared vision
is our goal to provide our students the absolute best
education.
With the resource sources available or is adequate good enough.
What level of excellence does the board hope to achieve?
And I believe Sarah, that's a question for the board
or is, yeah, I think Sarah's, and I think it's
a philosophical question and not one we're gonna be able
to answer tonight.
Yeah, I can't answer. Well, I know I'm not striving
for adequate, so yeah, same.
So I thought I don't have an answer. Next question.
I'm trying to get to.
This was asked a couple different times, like when do
we.
Decide like, like
no go or go, you know, like at what point.
Have we built that into.
Our plan with reconfiguration that.
We're not ready. I don't, I don't know. At, at
this point, the board has taken a vote that we
need to be ready. And so that is our.
Job. And we are going to do everything in our
power to do it the absolute best. We know that
people's children are their most valuable yeah. Treasured resource. And
we take that seriously. Well, I mean, maybe that's a
question for the board and terms of like,
how are we overseeing this process?
I dunno, but I think it's worth.
Talking about
I don't.
The couple, several questions about the role of superintendent. What,
what, you know, what role would they play in leading
this reconfiguration?
Leading the priorities.
When are we hiring? I think we already spoke to
that.
But yeah, I mean,
I think this new superintendent is going to be inheriting
a lot of change. They're not really leading anything. Right.
They're going to show up with a new plan. Mm-hmm
but I mean, you might know what, what you
would wanna do when, when they show up on June 30th.
I.
I have full confidence in our.
Team, both in the leadership and our teacher leadership here.
That by the time that July 1st rolls around that we
will be on a really strong path to opening school.
I've got some more. Yeah. You want, you can take
over. I know there's a question. If Abigail could maybe
explain again, the teacher cost increase over the next couple
years you had. And the slide, I think, talked about
that 6% in increase.
Yeah. So that comes from just lining up.
All salaries, adding it up.
Doing the same thing in the next year.
Seeing what the percentage increase actually is, and it is
higher than 6%.
So that's just something we have to think about and
be really careful with, from any given fiscal year to
the next.
Because it creates that automatic built-in tension.
Between the percentage of the taxpayers.
Taxpayers can bear versus what our, how our costs will
increase.
So we have to think about that very carefully and
all decisions.
Decisions, but, but to be clear, I mean,
you know, I, I think the all contracts were negotiated
in good faith and that's not.
Anyone's fault. I mean, that's things happened in good faith
and now it's for us to afford it.
And to make it work as best we can. So
I, I just, I wanna say that.
Cuz it, I just wanna say that.
Member Smith. Do you have more questions? Yeah, there was
a question about what is the plan with reconfiguration for
special ed kids and maintaining consistency.
I, I know there's probably a lot of details to
be worked out, but.
Sure. And again, I think I spoke to.
Some listening that we wanna do with families and parents.
And then also with our teachers who are in our
special purpose programs.
Programs redirect answers like any, no plans or there is
a plan.
I, I did say there's a plan. We are going
to talk to parents and then we are going to
talk to our educators.
Educators. It is.
I'm sorry, that feels insufficient for the public.
I that's, that's the answer that she's providing for you
at this point?
So that, that's what we know at this point. That's
the plan is to speak to educators and to speak
to parents.
And their, their, there isn't any more details that are
available at this point, but as soon as they are.
Dr. Prince will make them available.
I got one. Yeah. Yeah. Go ahead. Would the district
consider placing a referendum question on the ballot to better
understand community voting patterns?
Patterns voting patterns.
Patterns. So I'll answer that. That's.
That's it's
it's the, there, there, if there's an interest in asking
a referendum question,
there's a process by which you would go through that
the city council has said clearly it's not their role.
They're not going to place a referendum question.
Because the board has already taken a vote.
And the board is not gonna place a referendum question.
So.
That's a question for the public and the process.
Can be
pursued through the city clerk.
Do do you have more questions?
Questions. Yeah. Sorry. I'm somebody's texting me there so that
I couldn't write down quickly.
Like Lauren, sorry.
Will staff and parents be able to request a change
of assigned school. Doesn't meet educators, child, or family's needs.
Will the district need to honor these requests.
Requests this requesting configuration question. Yeah, that was que asked.
Sure. I, I spoke to this the other night. We
have an elementary interdistrict waiver.
Process that we have used whereby a family.
Can request this. I would assume that that process would
move forward.
However it is not, they are not all.
Approved. It goes through a process of review.
And again, some of them are approved and some of
them are not depending on the, the reasons in the
situation.
And might it not be also that.
Through the process of dialogue.
With parent groups and so, so forth that some ideas
might come up of how that might be handled.
Handled right. In other words, because this is a new
situation. So that's an existing method, but is it possible
that.
Collaboratively something could be
created
I don't see that process changing fundamentally, but certainly we
can revisit if that's an interest in the.
Community. Yeah, we could do that.
There other questions. Yeah. I mean, it, I, I think.
A question regarding, can the.
A detailed plan, identifying steps and figures for reconfiguration.
Be included with the budget.
For council's.
Blessing.
I think
the city council will take their vote on May 5th on
the budget.
And certainly by that time we will provide, we'd be
happy to provide the city council.
An update on the plan as they take their vote
on May 5th.
Okay. And thank you for clarifying that we, we made
a mistake earlier and said May 4th and oh yes, it
was May 5th is May 5th. Thank you.
We had a question about the FY 2025 audit report.
I believe we've seen that. Haven't we, we, a few
of us were there at city council. It is presented
as a joint audit report from our external auditors. So
a number of us were there and it is post
on online and we had.
Reviewed it. Abigail has responded in writing.
To our findings.
But certainly if the board asks for something different, we
could arrange that.
Okay. I think I've got one more here with class
size changes. What are the expectations of student and staff
performance?
Outcomes. I mean,
well, they, I guess, will they change?
Will the, I, I don't like, how are we measuring
that?
Sure. So we are always looking at our student data
to see how our students are performing across a variety
of metrics. And.
We are doing all of this in service of moving
those learning outcomes as, as high as possible. That's why
we're here.
Okay.
Thank you. Thank you, Dr.
Prince. I think that's like the best I could do.
Thank you. No, that was great. I appreciate that. Appreciate
your help. Did you have anything else?
A lot of questions that are maybe.
Not answerable now. Yeah. Yeah. There were, there were a
lot of questions that were.
Yeah, but we can share them with frustration and they
can share out his.
As needed next, next meeting. That's great. I think that's
great. Thank you.
We are at 4.2, which is consideration and action to.
Convene a meeting with city council.
To seek budgeting guidance.
And I need a motion to put that.
I need an, a person to put that on the
floor.
Moved by member feller and seconded by member Richardson.
Member feller. Sure.
I mean, why not have a conversation with them? We're
talking to 'em on Tuesday.
Anyways. So this
can you clarify?
If we're meeting with them on Tuesday.
What this is about. I mean, it's it, is it
about providing.
Some certainty on what we're asking them for.
No on two on Tuesday.
Is is just the workshop presentation of where we are.
It's gonna depend upon whether we adopt a budget.
This, this
motion consideration and action to convene a meeting.
With city council could
be amended to specify an amount and a purpose for
what, what it is.
How much people wanna ask for and.
And for what purpose that's totally up to.
The board. Can I remember Richardson? I, I.
Would like to not
agree on an amount. I think that.
This community.
And myself, this feels like a city.
Crisis that requires
requires a conversation with
our elected leaders on
on behalf of the city, you know, representing our city.
I, I think
I think that
there are concerns valid concerns from the district to.
Request a higher tax increase to put jobs back into
the budget because the sustainability of that is concerning long-term,
which I understand.
I
do not feel comfortable approving a budget without a fund
balance. And I believe a tax increase is the only
way to do that.
What that amount is. I think I, I don't wanna.
I don't feel like I don't know why we wanna.
Put boundaries around that. Right? This second.
I think that that's part of what we wanna discuss
with city council. What, what is reasonable?
I also think there's a lot of questions in this
community about what other.
Mechanisms are in place for city councils for CI the
city to help us.
I know I've had conversations with counselors. A lot of
us have had those con conversations.
Some of you had have, but the public has not
benefited from that transparency in a way.
That this conversation will facilitate.
It will allow them to explain.
What they can do and what they can't do.
I know, I have questions about the limitations around the
use of their fund balance.
A fund balance is I think to be used in
an emergency.
This feels a little bit like an emergency crisis.
Really amazing news. We heard from Augusta. So.
I also just wanna throw in that I got a
text from representative.
Kessler that the EPS formula.
Is going to changes are gonna potentially provide us with
an additional $750,000 for next year's budget.
So I think as we think about potentially using.
The additional funds that we just, that 300,000.
We can think about potentially putting positions back in the
budget.
And being able to retain them, knowing that we're looking
at some additional funding next year from the state.
So I just think that.
That
that this is a, this, you know, I, I mean,
I don't, I don't see any need to amend the
language.
On this motion, I think to Daniel's point, what's the
harm in having a conversation?
The community desperately wants us to, I think it would
be a.
Complete disservice to not have this conversation.
And I really, really hope that we have a unanimous
decision on this from the board, because.
Cuz we need to, we need to partner with our
city.
Officials on this.
And you know what the outcome of that conversation is,
will be revealed. But.
Yeah, that's what I think.
Member Smith. Yeah. I just wanna say that I totally
agree with everything she said.
The Le and we also will have time over the
next two weeks to meet with city council multiple times.
So our first meeting doesn't, we don't have to go
in with any stipulations. I think we can go in
to have a conversation. And then the next meeting on
April 14th, there can maybe Mo be more.
Specificity. Yep.
Here here.
Other other member fell.
Feller, what board member Richardson said was dope. And I
agree. .
Exactly. I'm sorry, I didn't hear what you said. I,
I concur with board member Richardson.
Ember rich.
So if we had some kind of understanding, we can
still amend the budget. If we were to approve it
tonight.
Is that true, George? Yeah, that's true. Can you say
that again? I'm sorry if we approve the budget tonight
and we talk to the council and they say here's
some more guidance.
Can we amend the budget? I think that's what I'm
saying up to accept more money into the budget. Yes.
Yes. Sure.
Okay.
That was, that was their recommendation. Yeah.
Other, other other members.
A member Richardson.
I know this is like a Debbie downer, but I
think it's tricky.
To approve this budget tonight, we just learned we have
300 extra thousand dollars.
To potentially
put some positions. Do we know when we didn't hear
when though? Right. Well, I know exactly like, I mean,
is that like, can we clear this? So anytime
soon or is that like next? Yeah, but I just
think like, if we can just, yeah, sorry, one person's
talking. Sorry. That's that's totally fair. Okay.
Yeah, I just, I just wanna be.
I just wanna be careful about.
Doing what we were just told on the board, just
because it's on the board.
I wanna think critically about, about that plan.
And, and, and feel somebody feel free to disagree with
me, but I am I'm. I know I'm not in
a position to wanna approve this budget tonight.
For other reasons, but
I just, I really don't wanna limit.
What we, what I don't wanna limit our options because.
You know, we've lost 12% of our staff with this
budget.
Did you have more? You wanted to say, remember Holman.
Although I have been advised by some people I admire
to go ahead and approve the budget.
I, I feel similarly that there are some things that
I, I mean, I guess I.
I I, part of, I think I wanna hold out
a little bit.
Because I I'm just not quite ready.
And it's not our last chance. So.
Yeah.
Members Smith and, you know, I mean,
well, I have something more to say, but I don't.
No, go ahead. Anybody this, well, it's a little bit
more extensive.
But, I mean, I guess what I want us, I
mean, a little bit of what I wanna say is
that, you know, to the public.
You know, kind of, I'm like kind of that chief
jerk here.
I'm the person who is here, the longest I'm in
my sixth year on the school board, I had the,
you know, I'm, you know, I'm one of the people
who was there and we voted to spend.
You know, the, when it seemed like, you know, oh,
there's a good idea coming outta the pandemic. We need
this extra money. Let's spend this stuff, you know, and
not, you know, I, I said before this, the, you
know, it hindsight is, does do something for you that,
that.
That that the moment can't. But I, I wanna say
that, you know, leadership is very important and especially as
far as finances go, we finally have some leadership. What
you number six or seven in five years. So number
seven in five years, it's very hard. If you don't
have leadership to know what's going on, especially if you
don't.
Don't, you know, anyway, I don't wanna get into more
about that, but, and it's an amazing experience to be
here and to listen to everybody, we've listened to a
lot. I know for a lot of people, it sounds
like no one is listening. And I understand that feeling.
And Lauren knows, I understand that feeling because we've be
been at those, those a, the com the comprehensive plan
committee meetings. And there are some real jerks on.
There. Okay. Even wear some me and.
And, and I understand that feeling, but I just wanna
say, you know, that the sense that no one's listening
because.
Because it hasn't gone because of you're feeling great disappointment.
Because you're upset at upset doesn't mean that no one
listened or that the people who made the decisions they've
made don't care at all.
You know, it's not that that is not what's necessarily
happening. Certainly I'm none. Not in anyone else's case that
I can think of. Who's here.
And so, yeah, but I do wanna hold out because
I, I know, I hope we can, we can achieve
something better.
And as I said, oh, and the other thing is,
you know, it is hard, it's amazing experience to incur
the wrath of strangers. It is also a very hard
experience to lose a respect of people. You greatly respect,
like, like Laura, Steven, someone I really respect. She's learned
she's a, a fantastic educator and she's kept, she's been
urging me to do different things. And I, you know,
you feel badly, you know, I just wanna say so.
You know, all good intent. I think I'm gonna pause
on the budget.
number Smith. Yeah, I, I.
Agree. Just the two points about.
What potentially FY 28 will look like with a new
state budget and this new $300,000. I think there's at
least.
I would like to hear from administration about what they
think we should be doing with that money. Mm-hmm .
And going from there, I don't want the board to
be having a conversation about what specific positions they want
to put in.
To be very clear. I, I, yeah. Sorry.
Member Keller I'll just second it with Tyler.
Just said
have had a lot of good feedback from the community.
And, and from the folks who are putting together this
budget,
to not speak on individual positions. I, I, I feel
like I, I have done that in the last couple
meetings and it's something I, I really don't wanna do
anymore. And, and I apologize. I just kind of speaking
to my lack of experience as a board member member
Richardson.
Oh, yeah.
I, I, I wanna
second, what Kareen Altham.
Asked that, you know,
our teachers went and asked for that money. I want
our teachers to get that money. So, and staff, no
director.
Positions, please with that money.
Thank you a member darling, over the question.
Thank you. All those in favor of moving the question.
Wait say the question again? This poor. Oh, to move
the question. So for close to baked.
What that's where we're gonna move the question. We're gonna
call the question.
And call for a vote. So what member.
Dowling asked for was a motion to.
Move the question. So, and I'm just saying all those
in favor it's items four point. Okay. Just meaning stop
4.2, 2.24 point a yes or no. I don't understand
what this means. This is consideration and action to can
be a meetings with city council to seek budgetary, all
those in, in favor and all those against.
Okay. That's correct. All right. Yeah. The new thing. Yeah.
All, all those in favor of.
Action to convene a meeting with the city council.
Yeah. And opposed
okay. That's unanimous.
She have a hard I'm hearing you, your microphone is
away.
You
the next item is consideration and action to adopt an
FY.
FY 27 superintendent's budget as the board's budget proposal.
To be advanced to the city council move this way
cuz you don't let's pull that down. Yeah.
Thank you.
Is there.
Any action on this is there. We're moving that forward.
We're freezing that. What, what do people wanna do?
I, I mean, we don't, whatever you want. I'd like
to move that to a, a future meeting. Well, okay.
Board let's let's not take action on it then.
Can I say, can I say.
One thing about that. Yeah.
Is, you know, to Tyler's point.
Do we, how do we ask.
Officially the administration to
think about those extra dollars.
Is that
amending this motion. I don't know. I'm no, I, I,
I think I deferred, I think it's well, is it
evident no, no. I mean, I got a text
message from a different legislator who gave a different number,
so I, I think we need to yeah. Do get
the number and we need to know.
And the person who
messaged me said, this is a one year thing. So
we wanna consider that, you know, if it's one year
and there isn't gonna be a change.
In the amount going forward. What, what do we want
to, what do we wanna do with that money? And.
Yeah. So I, I, I think, I think there's a
lot of information for.
Superintendent at whistle and assistant superintendent and, and business manager.
I think it's just important to note that next week
when we go to.
City council, they will be expecting us to present on
what the budget is.
As of today, or again, if the board is going
to convene Monday night,
so again, I, I wanna be transparent with the public
that if they come to that meeting,
and the board has not convened again. It will not
change substantially. What city council.
Sees on Tuesday again, Tuesday is their first opportunity to
see it. It's a presentation.
And then they will workshop at the following. So there
is opportunity for us to change it.
But we, we have to put something in front of
them by.
By our agreements. So
and I think the only other thing I would say
is to be clear if we don't make a vote
on the budget.
What goes forth is the superintendent's budget, not the school
board's budget. So.
That that's all there is to present.
At this point.
If there's no action or, and, and if we're not
going to meet to take any.
Action on Monday night, which would be the only other
time we would have to.
To me.
So
what I'm sorry, what would happen on Monday, Rosemary? I
would just saying that's the only opportunity if the board
wanted to meet again, would be on Monday.
I'm just, you know,
gotta not lose the threat here. I would, I would
like to meet on Monday. Well, for, for what purpose?
To talk about budget to get the budget passed.
Can, can we, sorry. Are you done? Sorry.
Can we try to shore up what these figures are.
So that, and maybe that's what we're meeting on the,
the figures that might be coming from the state. Yeah.
That's the question. Yeah. Yeah.
Like accurate to get accurate figures. Sure. We will. Absolutely.
I can see one of the figures has been updated
in our EDG 2 79. So we can use that if
the board convenes again on Monday, that is absolutely their
choice. The administrative team will not have had a chance
to gather, to gather, to bring you a new recommendation
by that point.
Again, that doesn't need to stop you.
Continuing to discuss your priorities.
But just level setting expectations for when you would see
something.
But I think we, we heard clearly a few members
say that.
That those those dollars.
That we've heard about are to.
Invest in staff positions. So.
Well, I, I, I don't think you have that action.
The board has not decided that we'll let, can we
discuss that?
Correct. I'm just saying that's what I, that's what I've
heard. Correct. You haven't taken any action on a charge?
I'm just repeating what I have heard. I think that's
what if you're talking about that's what you wanna meet
about on Monday.
Then we can put, put, we can put that on
the agenda for.
Monday to have it be a single.
Action consideration and action to adopt the FY 27 superintendent's
budget.
As the board's budget proposal to be advanced to the
city council.
And talk about if there's more information, what people want
to do with that money.
It's just, well, I mean, I member feller, I don't.
Don't does it make sense for us to all convene
here and address that question?
When I think the answer on what we do with
that money.
Is pretty obvious.
It sounds like a bunch of staff went to Augusta
and asked for more money.
To support staff. So like,
we're not gonna put that money in the reserve fund.
Well, Daniel, I, I mean member feller, I'm sorry. I
don't believe we should. Yeah. Oh, okay. But there's no
action by this board.
So I'm just saying we don't have a position what
we're gonna do with that money. So,
does the board want to meet on Monday?
To discuss that there is no, you have an opinion
and you're certainly entitled to that. Mm-hmm but this
board has not taken an action about that because we
can't. Right. We probably, well, we can't, we don't even
know how much money it is. Yeah. Right, right. We
don't, we don't even have an amount I support taking.
I, I think let's try to take an action on
that on Monday.
Hoping that we have a number.
So, so do we, what, what just one question. So
do, is it hold on mm-hmm if it makes
sense to.
Wait and see if we have a number.
That there's no point in meeting. If there isn't anything
to meet on so we could make a decision tomorrow.
About whether
whether we were going to meet on Monday or not
does that? Yeah, you can makes sense. You can tentatively
yeah. Ask people to hold Monday. Mm-hmm yeah. So
just in the event that you have what you need
and we can see what we're able to find.
Okay.
We're at the
second.
Part of public comment are there before I.
Read the rules of public comment. Are there people who
are going to speak.
the board's public comment is an opportunity for the board
to listen to opinions of the public.
That relate to school and education matters on or off
this evening's agenda.
And the board is here to listen. Anyone wishing to
speak.
Will be asked to proceed to the microphone and state
your name and town or city where you reside.
All questions will be recorded by the superintendent.
And answered at the end of public comment to the
extent possible.
If answers are not available, someone will be assigned to
reply to you. As soon as the answer is available.
I understand you'll have three minutes to speak. I would
ask that there be no interaction between the public and
board members.
Ask if they be no clapping or booing or other
interrupted behavior sound like so dumb will be allowed. As
a reminder board member, board meetings, a broadcast live recorded
and posted on the city's website. Please consider the impact.
Yes.
Bill Newton, still a parent of a skill in kindergartner.
So two days after telling us for weeks, they can
get it done in the time allotted. It took two
days.
For the district to publicly admit they need more time
than what was scheduled. And this was just the first
ask.
Overall, I understand and respect the opinion of those that
feel once a decision has been made, we need to
move forward.
How I think, however, I think one of the big
reasons.
Reasons our whole country is in its current state is
well well-meaning people.
Deciding to move forward when something that doesn't make sense
is happening.
And despite that belief
I was probably going to come around on this by
June.
I think that's because I had a parent-teacher conference this
week.
In kindergarten, teachers can be very reassuring.
Thank you, Mrs. BTOs.
Bartos but two days
that's all it took to throw something else at parents
that could shake up the rest of the school year
and put families in a tough position because the district
is taking on a project.
We all know it doesn't have enough time to properly
plan.
I understand the proposal to add four more early release
days was just a proposal and that it was removed.
Removed that doesn't matter. Brainstorming is great.
But you can truly have bad ideas if they are
presented to the public.
And this one was appalling.
This honestly, it's starting to feel like the general new
cycle in our country.
Before you can process and react to something that doesn't
make sense or is deeply felt.
Another thing is thrown at you to process.
Also
before moving forward, there needs to be accountability taken by
the board members and administrators.
Who contribute to this vast system? Systemic failure.
I appreciate member Holman, apologizing for approving prior budgets that
have drained our fund balance.
I really do. My question is how is the board
going to hold itself and administrators.
Accountable for what has happened.
Another question is just
last week, there was a survey provided to the board
by, I think by teachers that was dismissed as not
including the number of teachers responding, including.
Being mocked actually by member home and for not including
that data.
A member of the public then said that data was
included.
Included. My question is who was right in that situation,
was that data included.
Included. And what does that mean to the board? If
it was.
So member Daniels said last week.
Everything we're doing up here is about the bottom line
and changes should be about saving money.
Remember DeAngelis then went on to vote against closing a
school, which supposedly saves the district a significant amount. .
Last year. Remember Dean also argued that the district shouldn't
eliminate three SEL teachers because the district wouldn't have enough
time to adjust the programming before the following school year,
but voted for reconfiguration this year, which is a much
larger project.
In the same timeframe.
Member DS is also against raising the ask of taxpayers.
Taxpayers based on the information provided by the district. That
means member deans would prefer to eliminate 12 to 16
more positions since she doesn't want to close a school.
Member Dean. I would like to give you the opportunity
to please explain.
Why you didn't vote to close the school to save
more money? When this budget is about cuts.
Cuts think this year that this massive reconfiguration project is
able to be done well when last year adjusting one
program was thought to be too much.
And why your preference is to cut 12 to 16.
More positions. Some members say that number may even be
higher.
In the district to balance the steer school budget, since
you don't wanna.
Close a school. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Newton.
Meredith diamond just here to.
Do some fact checking based on publicly available data. I'm,
I'm confused by the silos.
Silos that are keeping information separate in this district, but.
Just a couple of things that I, I, a couple
of openings I wanna create first.
Last year I'm I'm disturbed by the idea that there
isn't going to be a, a board facing audit presentation.
This is a fixture of districts. I'm, I'm confused by
the idea that anybody who wants to know what happened
in the audit would have to go to a city
council meeting and then parse from that.
Relevant information about the district specifically.
But on, on the district website, we have.
The auditors.
Statement of certification, which is required to ensure that we
are in compliance with statute in the state of Maine.
In that report from last year, there are very specific
incidences of us being out of compliance based on overspending
and not reporting expenditures and revenues in a way that
honestly was kind of shocking to read.
And the accountant or I'm sorry, the auditor was here
for the report to answer questions from the board.
I would love to see that happen again. I would
be confused by the board's decision to not require it.
In addition on the website, there is a response statement
from last year's superintendent explaining.
Some of these errors. I would like to see the
same from, from this year's administration.
Another point of clarification that I would like to make.
Has to do with the class size numbers on the.
Class size numbers on the reporting out about testing at.
Brown and small last year versus.
Skilling and Caler in one of the early March presentations,
there was a detail of class sizes for each of
the grade levels at each of those buildings.
Buildings. And I couldn't figure out exactly which meeting it
was at because I'm trying to do all this while
everyone else is talking. But it's evident on those slides
that the class sizes at the buildings that saw the
significant growth from 24 to 25 were significantly smaller.
Than class sizes at schools where the growth was either
stagnant or regressive.
And so I just wanted to offer that point of
clarification. Thank you.
Thank you.
Charlie Fox.
Evan Strait me again.
So I am
here to say, we need a lot of parents tonight.
Professionals experts. We have south. Horn's a beautiful place.
I grew up in Maine I'm 43 years old.
I'd love this area. I moved my family. We moved,
bought a house here.
We wanna be in a community that, you know,
is very diverse. I want my son to grow up
in a diverse community.
I'm very passionate about that.
You know, it's very important to me. It disturbs me
if you know my business and, you know, my stance.
What was going on with ice and how I was
taking my business and posting up and posting against it.
And using my business as a platform pretty heavily.
Putting myself out there and losing customers on this.
You know, I
really want reconfiguration to happen, but I want it to
happen in a.
Proper way. I want us to use some of our
experts that we have here in south Portland.
To help out with it and help help it go
through.
Everybody keeps saying that we can't do it in timeframe.
And it's true. We can't. There is no school in
Maine that has done it this fast.
Let's not be the first. We don't need to be
the race.
We don't need to win everything.
All right. It's really disre, really harsh to know. Lastly.
This goes to Rosemary. I.
Need you to understand you're gonna be taking a lot
of punches. You're gonna take a lot of hits. And
a lot of people are gonna say stuff to you.
As they say to all the board members up here.
No, they don't at the same time. Say time. Yeah.
Please. Let me speak. Go ahead. This is my time.
Go ahead.
All right. So as people are gonna say stuff to
you, and they're gonna say it to your, maybe behind
your back, you need to be able to take that
as a chair.
You're supposed to be leading your members up here, orderly
and properly, and not sitting up there telling us about
your life stories and defending yourself.
We don't want to hear it. I'm sorry. Thank you.
Thank you. I'll be all right.
At the end of night, if.
We can't stop reconfiguration going forward.
Like the parent over there, who's talking from Kayla. I
will vote. No, there's a lot. If you have not
looked online.
And seen what the, all the groups are saying. A
lot of people are angry and frustrated.
They're also talking about voting. No.
I really hope that we can come together as a
community and work through this cuz I've a lot of
us have lost a lot of trust in what's going
on around here right now. And it's really heartening and
it hurts me a lot.
Both me and my family have thought about possibly moving
in the future.
Or sooner because of this decision and how this is
going, we don't wanna be in a community.
That can't that I can't trust.
And I can't have a kid to grow up in
and trust.
It really hurts me. It's my timer. .
Thank you.
Jamie Watson teacher. I just have two questions for clarification.
One is about the referendum, about the questions, about asking
the voters, what they would vote for. I spoke to
a city counselor yesterday who said we could, we could
certainly do that cuz we did it with the field.
So I'm not sure why we have to go to
the city clerk and do all of that when we
excuse administrative I'm I'm not sure who, whoever it is.
I, why were we able.
To do that about the football fields in grass and
turf, but we can't do that about this budget.
And then my second question is with six students being
placed out of district between a hundred and $125,000 per
student.
That's a lot of money. And are we working towards
getting these students back in the district?
I do live in Lewiston. So.
We have gone through a lot of that out of
district placement and Lewiston is reigning that back in. So
I'm wondering, are we able to do that? And are
we working towards that? Thank you.
Thank you, Jamie.
This is somewhat reiterating what people have said, but it
is illuminating that it is possible. I understand to put
this on the ballot, I'm wondering why that wasn't proposed
earlier or why you guys didn't make greater efforts to
do so. It, this is clearly a very good galvanized
issue for everyone.
Also speaking to Brian's statements.
I, I was in support of what he said. I
I'm in many group threads where people were applauding him.
Those are, I think generally speaking people have been restrained
in their comments and they have deeper feelings inside that
they, that Brian.
Got out for them and if, and perhaps was even
restrained himself. And so.
I I understand that this is challenging to hear, but
that's part of, part of the job.
And, and I also think it's inappropriate to use this
time.
To speak about your personal life.
Everyone. I'm sure all of you are good people. Everyone
in this audience is good people. Well-intentioned that it's, that
is a given.
But if you're gonna make hard decisions, then you have
to be able to.
Stand up to the, to the blow back. Thank you.
Yes. Thank you.
Abby, Keenan. I forgot to say last time I have
three kids. Sorry, could you give your name again? Yep.
three kids.
First grader, fourth grader and a sixth grader.
I just, I have, I didn't even get like half
of the things I was going to talk about last
time, but I just wanna use this time to just
reflect on.
Like where we've been the last five to six years
as a community in the school. And like, I, everything
I base.
Time timeline is kind of when my oldest started kindergarten,
which was 2019.
Like, just to kind of like paint a picture of
what this community has been going through for five to
six years, living in the state of.
Chronic stress and being scared.
And when people are scared, they act emotionally and irrationally
and.
I think obviously with it's become quite heated over these.
Conversations and
just like 20, 20 the pandemic.
Parents everyone's super stressed out.
Then the next year, first grade, the hybrid model.
Half in half hour parents, everyone is stressed. And I
have to say like the south port, the way that
south Portland handled.
Handled the pandemic. I was just.
Very impressed by and the teachers and everyone was just
like amazing and carried.
Carried my children through, and I really appreciate that.
That's at the end of 2021. I think that's when
Ken Coonan left and we had a new superintendent.
And then
the following year.
Or at some point in theirs when everything happened with
Mahoney and Memorial and.
That was very emotional for people. We changed.
Built the new middle school. There was a lot of
painful growing pains. So I hear from the first year.
And then
along the same timeframe was the boundaries and configuration.
Meeting or
like, whatever that was called the.
Subcommittee or, and that again, brought up a lot of
heated.
Discussion from people.
And it, I have to say it was very disappointing.
That nothing kind of came of that, that there was
this actionable item that never.
Went anywhere.
And I think that also kind of gives people pause
when.
Putting our trust in
others to, to, to look at the data and what
are we doing doing 30 seconds left.
And then
last year or at some point there was.
The to meth Methin left Mathi and then we have
a new.
Interim superintendent and who knows all these other things pre-K
was added last year. I think I might have my
timelines off, but.
Last year was staff cuts. And now, again with all
of this, so I just think there's just so much
going on and people have been just so chronically, like
to their core.
As a parent and educators just like.
Maxed out. And I think that.
Is reflected in everyone and it's, it's three minutes.
So just thank you for, for everyone. Yeah. Thank you
for everyone.
And especially the school staff.
So, thanks Abby.
Thank you there. Anybody else? Who's ready to speak.
Sing non-public comments close. Thank you.
We are at school board communications.
People have any comments or questions or things they wanted
to announce.
I will answer some questions that were asked.
About the referendum.
The, the reason when I was saying.
That, that you could, the public could put that on
the ballot is because the board has already.
Taken an action.
What we're required to do by state law is to
put a budget.
On the ballot for June 9th.
That's state statute.
And the
the school board took an action.
To move to reconfiguration.
So if there was going to be a response to
that by the public, it would be by the public
because the board.
Has already taken that action.
And so the, the, the board would not, at this
point.
Ha be, be in a position to put that question
out to referendum.
So that, that, that's the only, that's the only we're
gonna revote on the on and configuration public comment is
closed.
And I, and I would say that.
I, I have had lots of positive comments about speaking
about my personal life. That that was.
A positive thing. Well, what I'm just saying is there,
there isn't really reason to be unkind to someone like
there, there isn't any good reason for that said a
lot. Stop all. I'm not said anything. I, if I,
if I.
Okay. This meeting is adjourned without further notice. Thank you
without.
Objection.